Paste or import your nursing reference text here.

Suggested workflow:
- Keep each major topic under a clear heading.
- Use clean plain text when possible.
- Remove repeated page numbers and OCR noise if available.

Example:

Compiled by
juma mwanigu
1 | P a g e
ACUTE CONDITIONS……………………………………004
SPACE OCCUPYING LESSIONS………..………….….004
TUMORS.……………………………….……….…007
INFECTIONS……………….……………….......…018
MENINGITIS.…………………….………………….029
ENCEPHALITIS.………………….………….……...028
BRAIN ABSCESSES..…………………………….…..047
VASCULAR DISORDERS …………………………………052
TRANSIENT ISCHAEMIC ATTACK ………………..….052
CEREBRAL VASCULAR ACCIDENT…………………...064
INTRACRANIAL ANEURYSM ……………………….…080
HEAD INJURY ……………………………………..……093
SPINAL CORD INJURY.………………………………127
SPINAL DISC PROBLEMS………………………….…148
2 | P a g e
PPPP
CHRONIC NEUROLOGICAL CONDITIONS ………………162
SEIZURE DISORDER (EPILEPSY)……………………. 162
CHRONIC DEGENERATIVE DISORDERS.…………………177
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS …………………….……..….177
PARKINSON’S DISEASE …………………..……..…189
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS……….…….…203
DEMENTIA ………….…….….……..………….…215
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE …………………………..…229
PERIPHERAL NERVE DISORDERS………………….……..242
GUILLAIN’S-BARRE SYNDROME …………………..…242
DISORDERS OF THE NEUROMUSCULAR JUNCTION ………256
MYESTHENIA GRAVIS …………………………….…256
BELL’S PALSY …………………………………….…267
CEREBRAL PALSY ……………………………….....273
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHIES ………………………….293
3 | P a g e
4 | P a g e
ACUTE CONDITIONS 
A. SPACE OCCUPYING LESSIONS
Definition
An “Intra-cranial space occupying lesion” is defined as an 
abnormal mass or lesion in the cranial cavity that consumes 
the intracranial volume.
5 | P a g e
6 | P a g e
A space-occupying lesion of the brain may result from:
1- Tumors 
Benign : Meningiomas
Malignancy: primary or metastatic
2- Inflammatory causes: Abscess, Tuberculoma, Syphilitic 
gumma, fungal Granulomas. 
3- Parasitic infections: Cysticercosis, Hydrated cyst, ame￾bic abscess, Schistosoma japonicum. 
4- Traumatic brain injury: Subdural & Extradural hema￾toma. 
5- Congenital causes: Dermoid, Epidermoid, Teratoma.
7 | P a g e
1. TUMORS
Neoplasms- brain tomors
 A brain tumor is a localized intracranial lesion that occu￾pies space within the skull. 
 Primary brain tumors originate from cells and structures 
within the brain. 
 Secondary, or metastatic, brain tumors develop from struc￾tures outside the brain (lung, breast, lower gastrointestinal 
tract, pancreas, kidney, and skin [melanomas]) 
 Brain tumors may be classified into several groups: 
8 | P a g e
a.those arising from the coverings of the brain (eg, du￾ral meningioma), 
b.those developing in or on the cranial nerves (eg, 
acoustic neuroma), 
c.those originating within brain tissue (eg, glioma), 
and metastatic lesions originating elsewhere in the 
body. 
 Tumors may be benign or malignant. A benign tumor may 
occur in a vital area and have effects as serious as a malig￾nant tumor.
Types of Tumors
9 | P a g e
 Gliomas, the most common brain neoplasms, cannot be to￾tally removed without causing damage, because they 
spread by infiltrating into the surrounding neural tissue.
 Meningiomas are common benign encapsulated tumors of 
arachnoid cells on the meninges.
 An acoustic neuroma is a tumor of the eighth cranial nerve 
(hearing and balance). 
 Pituitary adenomas may cause symptoms as a result of 
pressure on adjacent structures or hormonal changes such 
as hyperfunction or hypofunction of the pituitary.
 Angiomas are masses composed largely of abnormal blood 
vessels and are found in or on the surface of the brain. 
10 | P a g e
 The walls of the blood vessels in angiomas are thin, in￾creasing the risk for hemorrhagic stroke.
Clinical Manifestations
Increased ICP
Headache, although not always present, is most common 
in the early morning and is made worse by coughing, 
straining, or sudden movement. Headaches are usually 
described as deep, expanding, or dull but unrelenting. 
Frontal tumors produce a bilateral frontal headache; pi￾tuitary gland tumors produce bitemporal pain; in cerebel-
11 | P a g e
lar tumors, the headache may be located in the suboccip￾ital region at the back of the head.
Vomiting, seldom related to food intake, is usually due to 
irritation of the vagal centers in the medulla.
Papilledema (edema of the optic nerve) is associated with 
visual disturbances.
Personality changes and a variety of focal deficits, includ￾ing motor, sensory, and cranial nerve dysfunction, are 
common.
Localized Symptoms
The progression of the signs and symptoms is important 
12 | P a g e
because it indicates tumor growth and expansion. The 
most common focal or localized symptoms are hemipare￾sis, seizures, and mental status changes.
Tumor of the motor cortex: seizure like movements local￾ized to one side of the body.
Occipital lobe tumors: visual manifestations, such as 
contralateral homonymous hemianopsia (visual loss in 
half of the visual field on the opposite side of tumor) and 
visual hallucinations
Tumors of the cerebellum: dizziness; an ataxic or stagger￾ing gait, with tendency to fall toward side of lesion; 
marked muscle incoordination; jand nystagmus)
13 | P a g e
Tumors of the frontal lobe: personality disorders, changes 
in emotional state and behavior, and an apathetic mental 
attitude
Assessment and Diagnostic Methods
History of the illness and manner in which symptoms 
evolved.
Neurologic examination indicating areas involved
CT, MRI, positron emission tomography (PET), computer￾assisted stereotaicd (three dimensional) biopsy, cerebral 
angiography, EEG, and cytologic studies of the cerebro￾spinal fluid
14 | P a g e
Medical Management
A variety of medical treatments, including chemotherapy 
and external-beam radiation therapy, are used alone or 
in combination with surgical resection.
Surgical Management
A variety of treatment modalities may be used; the spe￾cific approach depends on the type of tumor, its location, 
and its accessibility. 
Other Therapies
Radiation therapy (the cornerstone of treatment for many 
15 | P a g e
brain tumors)
Brachytherapy (the surgical implantation of radiation 
sources to deliver high doses at a short distance)
IV autologous bone marrow transplantation for marrow 
toxicity associated with high doses of drugs and radiation
Gene-transfer therapy (currently being tested)
Nursing Management
Evaluate gag reflex and ability to swallow preoperatively.
Teach patient to direct food and fluids toward the unaf￾fected side.
Assist patient to an upright position to eat, offer a semi-
16 | P a g e
soft diet, and have suction readily available if gag re￾sponse is diminished.
Reassess function postoperatively.
Perform neurologic checks, monitor vital signs, and main￾tain a neurologic flow chart. Space nursing interventions 
to prevent rapid increase in ICP.
Reorient patient when necessary to person, time, and 
place. Supervise and assist with self-care. Monitor and 
intervene to prevent injury.
Monitor patients with seizures.
Check motor function at intervals; assess sensory dis￾turbances. 
17 | P a g e
Evaluate speech.
Assess eye movement, pupil size, and reaction.
18 | P a g e
2. INFECTIONS
a) MENINGITIS
 Meningitis is an inflammation of the lining around the 
brain and spinal cord caused by bacteria or viruses. 
 Meningitis is classified as septic or aseptic. 
 The aseptic form may be viral or secondary to lymphoma, 
leukemia, or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). 
 The septic form is caused by bacteria such as Streptococ￾cus pneumoniae and Neisseria meningitidis.
19 | P a g e
20 | P a g e
Pathophysiology
 The causative organism enters the bloodstream, crosses 
the blood–brain barrier, and triggers an inflammatory reac￾tion in the meninges. 
 Independent of the causative agent, inflammation of the 
subarachnoid and pia mater occurs. Increased intracranial 
ICP) results. 
 Meningeal pressure (infections generally originate in one of 
two ways: either through the blood stream from other in￾fections (cellulitis) or by direct extension (after a traumatic 
injury to the facial bones). 
 Bacterial or meningococcal meningitis also occurs as an 
21 | P a g e
opportunistic infection in patients with acquired immuno￾deficiency syndrome (AIDS).
 Bacterial meningitis is the most significant form. The com￾mon bacterial pathogens are;
a. N.meningitidis (meningococcal meningitis) and
b. S.pneumoniae, accounting for 80% of cases of menin￾gitis in adults. 
Clinical Manifestations
 Headache and fever are frequently the initial symptoms; 
a.Fever tends to remain high throughout the course of 
the illness 
22 | P a g e
b.Headache is usually either steady or throbbing and 
very severe as a result of meningeal irritation.
 Meningeal irritation results in a number of other well￾recognized signs common to all types of meningitis:
Nuchal rigidity (stiff neck) is an early sign.
Positive Kernig’s sign: When lying with thigh flexed 
on abdomen, patient cannot completely extend leg.
Positive Brudzinski’s sign: Flexing patient’s neck 
produces flexion of the knees and hips; passive flexion 
of lower extremity of one side produces similar move￾ment for opposite extremity.
Photophobia (extreme sensitivity to light) is common.
23 | P a g e
Rash (N. meningitidis): ranges from petechial rash with 
pur- puric lesions to large areas of ecchymosis.
Disorientation and memory impairment; behavioral 
manifestations are also common. As the illness pro￾gresses, 
a. Lethargy, 
b. Unresponsiveness, and 
c. Coma may develop.
Seizures can occur and are the result of areas of irrita￾bility in the brain; ICP increases secondary to diffuse 
brain swelling or hydrocephalus; initial signs of in￾creased ICP include decreased level of consciousness 
24 | P a g e
and focal motor deficits.
An acute fulminant infection occurs in about 10% of 
patients with meningococcal meningitis, producing 
signs of septicemia: 
a. an abrupt onset of high fever, 
b. extensive purpuric lesions (over the face and 
extremities), 
c. shock, and 
d. signs of disseminated intravascular coagula￾tion (DIC); death may occur within a few hours 
after onset of the infection
25 | P a g e
Assessment and Diagnostis
Computed tomography (CT) scan or magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) scan to detect a shift in brain contents 
(which may lead to herniation) prior to a lumbar punc￾ture.
Key diagnostic tests: bacterial culture and Gram staining 
of CSF and blood.
Medical Management
Vancomycin hydrochloride in combination with one of the 
cephalosporins (eg, ceftriaxone sodium, cefotaxime so￾dium) is administered by intravenous (IV) injection.
26 | P a g e
Dexamethasone has been shown to be beneficial as ad￾junct therapy in the treatment of acute bacterial menin￾gitis and in pneumococcal meningitis.
Dehydration and shock are treated with fluid volume ex￾panders.
Seizures, which may occur early in the course of the dis￾ease, are controlled with phenytoin (Dilantin).
Increased ICP is treated as necessary.
Nursing Management
 Assess neurologic status and vital signs constantly. De￾ter- mine oxygenation from arterial blood gas values and 
27 | P a g e
pulse oximetry.
 Insert cuffed endotracheal tube (or tracheostomy), and po￾sition patient on mechanical ventilation as prescribed.
 Assess blood pressure (usually monitored using an arte￾rial line) for incipient shock, which precedes cardiac or 
respiratory failure.
 Rapid IV fluid replacement may be prescribed, but take 
care not to overhydrate patient because of risk of cerebral 
edema.
 Reduce high fever to decrease load on heart and brain 
from oxygen demands.
28 | P a g e
 Protect the patient from injury secondary to seizure activ￾ity or altered level of consciousness (LOC).
 Monitor daily body weight; serum electrolytes; and urine 
volume, specific gravity, and osmolality, especially if syn￾drome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) is 
suspected.
 Prevent complications associated with immobility, such 
as pressure ulcers and pneumonia.
 Institute infection control precautions until 24 hours after 
initiation of antibiotic therapy (oral and nasal discharge is 
considered infectious).
29 | P a g e
b) ENCEPHALITIS
 Encephalitis is an acute inflammatory process of the brain 
tissue.
 
30 | P a g e
Types include:-
a.Herpes simplex encephalitis
b.Arthropod-bone encephalitis
c.Fungal encephalitis
Herpes simplex encephalitis
 Herpes simplex is the most common cause of acute enceph￾alitis.
 There are two types of herpes simplex virus 
a.HSV-1
b.HSV-2
 HSV-1 mainly affects children and adults but HSV-2 affects 
31 | P a g e
neonates who acquires the virus from there infected moth￾ers who have genital herpes.
Pathophysiology
 The pathology of encephalitis involves local necrotizing 
haemorhage that becomes more generalized, followed by 
odema. There is progressive deteroriation of the nerve cell 
bodies.
Clinical manifestation
The initial symptoms of HSV-1 includes headache, fever 
confusion, and hallucinations.
32 | P a g e
Focal neurological symptoms reflects the area of cerebral 
inflammation and necrosis and include; 
a.fever, 
b.headache, 
c.behavioral changes, 
d.focal seizures, 
e.dysphasia, hemiparesis, and 
f. altered level of consciousness.
Assessment and diagnosis
Neuroimaging studies such as Electroencephalo￾gram(EEG), and CSF examination are used to diagnose 
33 | P a g e
HSV encephalitis. 
MRI is the neuroimaging of choice to detect early changes 
caused by HSV encephalitis; the study shows odema in 
the frontal and temporal lobes.
The EEG shows the diffuse slowing or focal changes in 
the temporal lobe in the majority of patients.
Lumbar puncture always reveals high opening pressure, 
glucose within normal limits, and a high proteins level in 
the CSF samples.
Viral cultires are most always negative.
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is the standard test 
for early diagnosing of HSV-1 encephalitis.
34 | P a g e
Medical management
Antiviral agents such as acyclovir and Gancyclovir are the 
medication of choice for the treatment of HSV encephali￾tis.
Early administration of antiviral agent improves the prog￾nosis associated with HSV-1 encephalitis. The mode of 
action is inhibition of viral DNA replication.
To prevent relapse the treatment is extended up to three 
weeks.
Slow IV administration over one hour to prevent crystali￾sation of medication in the urine.
35 | P a g e
Nursing Management
Assessment of neurological function is key to monitoring 
the progress of desease. 
Comfort measures to reduce headache include diming the 
light, reduce noise and limit the number of visitors, 
grouping nursing interventions, and administering anal￾gesics . 
Opioid analgesics may mask neurologic symptoms there￾fore they are used carefully.
Seizure and altered level of consciousness requires care 
directed towards injury prevention and safety.
36 | P a g e
Nursing care addresses patient and family anxiety 
throughout the illness. 
Monitoring of blood chemistry test result and urine out￾put alerts the nurse to presence of renal complications 
relatedbto the antiviral therapy.
Arthropod-bone encephalitis
 Arthropod-bone viruses or Arboviruses, are mainly main￾tained in nature through biological transmission between 
susceptible vertebrate host by blood feeding arthropods e.g. 
mosquitoes, ticks, psychodids etc.
37 | P a g e
Pathophysiology
 Viral replication occurs at the site is mosquito bite . 
 The host immune response attempts to control the viral 
replication . 
 If the immune response is inadequate, viremia will occur.
 The virus get access to the central nervous system via the 
olfactory tract ,resulting in encephalitis. It spreads from 
neuron to neuron predominantly affecting the cortical grey 
matter ,brain stem and the thalamus. 
 Meningeal exudate produces the clinical presentation by ir￾ritating the meninges and increasing ICP.
38 | P a g e
Clinical manifestation
Arthropod-borne encephalitis occurs along a continuum 
with some cases having only flulike symptoms. I.e. fever 
and headache, but others proceeding to neulogical man￾ifestation that varies depending on the viral type . 
Onset of symptoms is abrupt and fever headache, dizzi￾ness, nausea, and malaise.
If the disease spread to the CNS , symptoms include stiff 
nack , confusion, dizziness and tremors. Coma can occur 
in severe cases, and mortality increases with age .
Assessment and diagnosis
39 | P a g e
Primarily diagnosis is based on clinical presentation and lo￾cation and date of recent travel because certain viruses are 
endemic in certain areas.
Neuroimaging and CSF analysis are useful in diagnosis 
encephalitis.
MRI demonstrate the inflammation of the basal ganglia 
and inflammation in the periventricular ganglia 
Immunoglobulin M are also observed in serological stud￾ies.
Electroencephalogram can identify abnormal brain waves 
which can help identify some viral infections.
40 | P a g e
Medical management
No specific medication for arbovirus exist; therefore 
symptoms management is key. Controlling seizures and 
increased ICP are critical components in the care in case 
of neurological manifestations.
Nursing management
Many patients particularly those with only fever and 
headache are treated on an outpatient an outpatient ba￾sis. If the patient is very ill hospitalization may be re￾quired.
41 | P a g e
The nurse carefully assess neurological status and iden￾tifies improvement or deterioration of patient condition.
Injury prevention is key in case of seizures or falls. Any 
encephalitis may progress to death or lifelong residual 
health issues, and therefore the family may need support 
to cope with the outcome.
Fungal encephalitis
 Fungal infection of the CNS occurs rarely in healthy people.
 It occurs mainly due to compromised immune system due 
to disease or immunosuppressive medication.
42 | P a g e
Causes of fungal infections include
Cryptococcus neoformans,
Blastomyces dermatitidis,
Hiotoplasma capsulatum,
Aspergillus fumigatus,
Candida.
Pathophysiology
 The fungal spores enters the body via inhalation. They ini￾tially infect the lungs, causing vague respiratory symptoms 
or pneumonitis.
 The fungi may enter the blood stream causing fungemia. If 
43 | P a g e
fungemia overwhelms the person’s immune system the 
fungus may spread to the CNS. 
 The fungal infection may cause meningitis, encephalitis 
brain abscess, granuloma, or arterial thrombus.
Clinical Manifestion 
The common symptoms of Fungal encephalitis are:-
Fever 
Malaise
Headache
Meningeal signs
Change in the level of consciousness 
44 | P a g e
Cranial nerve dysfunction
Symptoms of increased ICP related to hydrocephalus of￾ten occur.
Assessment and diagnosis
History of immuno-suppression associated with AIDS or 
use of immunosuppressive medications may indicate the 
disease.
Infections caused by H. capsulatum and C.himmitis will 
demonstrate fungal antibodies in serological tests.
The CSF normally demonstrates elevated white cells and 
protein levels while the glucose level is decreased.
45 | P a g e
C. neoformans is easily identified in CSF fungal cultures.
Candida may be cultured from the blood or the CSF.
Neuroimaging; to identify CNS changes related to fungal 
infection.
Medical management
 Medical management is directed at the causative Fungus 
and the neurologic and the neurological consequences of 
the infection.
 Antifungal agents are administered for speciflc period to 
cure the infection in patients with competent immune 
systems.
46 | P a g e
a.Amphoterisin B for fungal infections that does not re￾spond to conventional treatment. 
b.Fluconazole or flucytosine may be administered oraly 
in conjuction with Amphoterisin B as maintenance 
dose.
 Seizures are controlled antiseizure medications.
 Increased ICP is controlled by lumbar puncture or shunt￾ing of CSF.
 Nursing management aims at early identication of in￾creased ICP and its management (as discussed earlier)
47 | P a g e
c) BRAIN ABSCESSES
 A brain abscess is a collection of infectious material 
within the tissue of the brain.
 Bacteria are the most common causative organisms. An 
abscess can result from intracranial surgery, penetrating 
head injury, or tongue piercing. 
 Organisms causing brain abscess may reach the brain by 
hematologic spread from the lungs, gums, tongue, or 
heart, or from a wound or intra-abdominal infection.
 It can be a complication in patients whose immune sys￾tems have been suppressed through therapy or disease.
48 | P a g e
Prevention
To prevent brain abscess, otitis media, mastoiditis, rhi￾nosinusitis,hdentalninfec-tions,randksystemic infections 
should be treated promptly.
Clinical Manifestations
Generally, symptoms result from alterations in intracra￾nial dynamics (edema, brain shift), infection, or the loca￾tion of the abscess.
Headache, usually worse in morning, is the most prevail￾ing symptom.
Fever, vomiting, and focal neurologic deficits (weakness 
49 | P a g e
and decreasing vision) occur as well.
As the abscess expands, symptoms of increased intracra￾nial pressure (ICP) such as decreasing level of conscious￾ness and seizures are observed.
Assessment and Diagnostic Methods
Neuroimaging studies such as MRI or CT scanning to 
identify the size and location of the abscess.
Aspiration of the abscess, guided by CT or MRI, to culture 
and identify the infectious organism
Blood cultures, chest x-ray, electroencephalogram (EEG)
50 | P a g e
Medical Management
The goal is to eliminate the abscess. 
Treatment modalities include antimicrobial therapy;
a. The initial antibiotic is ceftriaxone adminis￾tered in high doses to cross the blood brain bar￾rier, and later adjusted to the antibiotic according 
to culture and sensitivity.
b.Surgical incision, or aspiration (CT guided stereo￾tactic needle). 
Medications used include corticosteroids to reduce the in￾flammatory cerebral edema and 
Antiseizure medications for prophylaxis against seizures 
51 | P a g e
(phenytoin, phenobarbital).
Abscess resolution is monitored with CT scans.
Nursing Management
Nursing interventions support the medical treatment, as 
do patient teaching activities that address neurosurgical 
procedures. Patients and families need to be advised of 
neurologic deficits that may remain after treatment (hem￾iparesis, seizures, visual deficits, and cranial nerve pal￾sies). 
52 | P a g e
3. VASCULAR DISORDERS
I. TRANSIENT ISCHAEMIC ATTACK
Definitions
 A transient ischemic attack (TIA) is a brief episode of neu￾rologic dysfunction caused by focal brain or retinal ische￾mia without evidence of acute infarction.
 Clinical symptoms typically last minutes to one hour (alt￾hough they can last up to 24 hours). 
 These symptoms can include motor, sensory, speech/lan￾guage, vision or cerebellar disturbances. 
53 | P a g e
 
 A stroke is defined as the sudden onset of focal neurological 
deficit resulting from either infarction or hemorrhage 
54 | P a g e
within the brain. Symptoms of a stroke are similar to that 
of TIA, however, they are not temporary.
Risk factors for stroke or TIA
Non-modifiable risk factors Modifiable risk factors
 Age 
 Hypertension
 Previous stroke or TIA 
 Hyperlipidemia
 Gender 
 Smoking
 Ethnicity (e.g., South Asian, Caucasian) 
55 | P a g e
 Cardiovascular disease
 Family History 
 Diabetes
Diagnosis
Key features are sudden onset and focal neurological deficits 
associated with a specific cerebral vascular territory. For ex￾ample:
Weakness − sudden loss of strength or numbness in the 
face, arm or leg
Difficulty with speech − sudden confusion or trouble 
speaking
56 | P a g e
Vision problems − sudden trouble with vision
Headache − sudden severe and unusual headache
Dizziness − loss of balance, especially with any of the 
above signs
Assessment
 TIA patients are at high risk for stroke. Timely investigation 
and management of TIAs significantly reduces the chance 
of stroke. 
 The ABCD score with vascular imaging will enable assess￾ment of the short term stroke risk after presenting with TIA.
57 | P a g e
Diagnostic tests for TIA
Laboratory Tests:
• Complete blood count
• Electrolytes – sodium, potassium
• Creatinine and eGFR
• Coagulation – INR, aPTT
• Troponin
• Lipids – Full profile
• Fasting blood glucose OR hemoglobin A1c.
Brain Imaging:
• CT is the investigation of choice in an acute stroke patient.
• MRI is performed only if recommended by consultant.
58 | P a g e
 Carotid Imaging: Is preferably performed within 24 hours 
in a carotid territory stroke/TIA in a patient who is apoten￾tial surgical candidate.
• Carotid ultrasound – is the preferred investigation, though 
any of the 3 tests are adequate.
• CT angiography – arch to vertex
• MR angiography – arch to vertex
Acute Management
Complete all appropriate and available investigations.
Temperature (treat > 38 degrees Celsius, as fever may con￾tribute to further brain injury or indicate a complication 
59 | P a g e
such as pneumonia).
 Neurological vital signs (initially Q4H).
 O2 saturation (treat arterial O2 desaturations).
 Blood sugar (treat hypo and hyperglycemia).
 Blood pressure (treat > 220 systolic or > 120 diastolic 
mmHg cautiously in first 48 hrs; aim for reduction by 10 
– 15% unless otherwise indicated by medical conditions).
 Heart rhythm (to assess for atrial fibrillation).
 Initiate appropriate secondary stroke prevention treat￾ments. 
Therapy Management.
60 | P a g e
 Stat CT head scan.
 Activate stroke team or initiate stat transfer to stroke cen￾tre in eligible patients. Once diagnosed determine eligibil￾ity for tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) therapy imme￾diately 
 Withhold anticoagulant therapy for first 24 hrs, after 
which, Daily low dose ASPIRIN® 81mg or clopidogrel 75 
mg should be given daily.
 After ruling out intracranial hemorrhage, patients not 
given tissue plasminogen activator should receive an im￾mediate one, loading dose of ASPIRIN 325 mg or 
clopidogrel 300 mg.
61 | P a g e
Continuing Management of TIA in the Emergency De￾partment
 Manage stroke patients on an acute stroke or general neu￾rological unit where possible. 
 Patients who have received tPA should be monitored in an 
intensive care unit. It is recommended that the core inter￾disciplinary team (e.g., medical, nursing, nutrition, occu￾pational therapy, physiotherapy, social work and speech￾language staff) assess patient within 48 hours of admis￾sion. 
Prevention of Medical Complications
62 | P a g e
 There are multiple possible complications post-stroke.
 Early mobilization and appropriate positioning during the 
first 24 hours are associated with improved outcomes. 
 Decubitus ulcer formation should be prevented by two 
hourly turning and pressure area care. Long lasting ulcers 
can develop rapidly in poorly mobilized patients; focus on 
positioning and nutritional support as well as mattress op￾timization.
 Consider referral to physiotherapist for rehabilitation ser￾vices as well as exercises to prevent shoulder pain with 
hemiplegia. 
 Venous thromboembolism: Pulmonary embolism accounts 
63 | P a g e
for 13 – 25% of early deaths post-stroke. Assess patients 
for prophylaxis with anticoagulant and/or leg compression 
with pneumatic compression devices. Graduated compres￾sion stockings are contraindicated.
Communication upon Discharge
 Provide stroke education and follow up information to the 
patient (refer to Patient Information section). 
 Communication with the patient’s family physician is of 
utmost importance at the time of hospital discharge after 
treatment for a stroke/TIA
64 | P a g e
II. CEREBRAL VASCULAR ACCIDENT
 Cerebrovascular accident (CVA) /ischemic is when blood 
flow to a part of the brain is stopped either by a blockage 
or the rupture of a blood vessel.
 There are two main types of cerebrovascular accident: 
an ischemic stroke is caused by a blockage; a hemor￾rhagic stroke is caused by the rupture of a blood vessel. 
Both types of stroke deprive part of the brain of blood and 
oxygen, causing brain cells to die. 
 There is a sudden loss of brain function resulting from a 
disruption of the blood supply to a part of the brain. 
65 | P a g e
66 | P a g e
Risk Factors
Nonmodifiable
 Advanced age (older than 55 years)
 Gender (Male)
 Race (African American)
Modifiable
 Hypertension
 Atrial fibrillation
 Hyperlipidemia
 Obesity
 Smoking
 Diabetes
67 | P a g e
 Asymptomatic carotid stenosis and 
 valvular heart disease (eg, endocarditis, prosthetic heart 
valves)
Clinical Manifestations
General signs and symptoms include numbness or weak￾ness of face, arm, or leg (especially on one side of body); 
confusion or change in mental status; trouble speaking 
or understanding speech; visual disturbances; 
loss of balance, dizziness, difficulty walking; or 
sudden severe headache.
68 | P a g e
Motor Loss
Hemiplegia, hemiparesis
Flaccid paralysis and 
loss of or decrease in the deep tendon reflexes (initial clin￾ical feature) followed by (after 48 hours)
reappearance of deep reflexes and abnormally increased 
mus- cle tone (spasticity)
Communication Loss
Dysarthria (difficulty speaking)
Dysphasia (impaired speech) or aphasia (loss of speech)
Apraxia (inability to perform a previously learned action)
69 | P a g e
Perceptual Disturbances and Sensory Loss
Visual-perceptual dysfunctions (homonymous hemiano￾pia [loss of half of the visual field])
Disturbances in visual-spatial relations (perceiving the 
rela- tion of two or more objects in spatial areas), fre￾quently seen in patients with right hemispheric damage
Sensory losses: slight impairment of touch or more severe 
with loss of proprioception; difficulty in interrupting vis￾ual, tactile, and auditory stimuli
Impaired Cognitive and Psychological Effects
Frontal lobe damage: Learning capacity, memory, or 
70 | P a g e
other higher cortical intellectual functions may be im￾paired. 
Depression, other psychological problems: emotional la￾bility, hostility, frustration, resentment, and lack of coop￾eration.
Assessment and Diagnostic Methods
History and complete physical and neurologic examina￾tion
Noncontrast CT scan
12-lead ECG and carotid ultrasound
CT angiography or MRI and angiography
71 | P a g e
Transcranial Doppler flow studies
Transthoracic or transesophageal echocardiography
Xenon-enhanced CT scan
Single photon emission CT (SPECT) scan
Prevention
Help patients alter risk factors for stroke; encourage pa￾tient to quit smoking, maintain a healthy weight, follow a 
healthy diet (including modest alcohol consumption), and 
exercise daily.
Prepare and support patient through carotid endarterec￾tomy.
72 | P a g e
Administer anticoagulant agents as prescribed (eg, low￾dose aspirin therapy).
Medical Management
Recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA), unless 
contraindicated; monitor for bleeding.
Possible hemicraniectomy for increased ICP from brain 
edema in a very large stroke.
Anticoagulation therapy
Management of increased intracranial pressure (ICP): os￾motic diuretics, maintain PaCO2 at 30 to 35 mm Hg, po￾sition to avoid hypoxia (elevate the head of bed to promote 
73 | P a g e
venous drainage and to lower increased ICP).
Intubation with an endotracheal tube to establish a pa￾tent airway, if necessary
Continuous hemodynamic monitoring antihypertensive 
treatment may be withheld unless the systolic blood pres￾sure exceeds 220 mm Hg or the diastolic blood pressure 
exceeds 120 mm Hg)
Neurologic assessment to determine if the stroke is evolv￾ing and if other acute complications are developing
Management of Complications
74 | P a g e
Decreased cerebral blood flow: Pulmonary care, mainte￾nance of a patent airway, and administration of supple￾mental oxygen as needed.
Monitor for UTIs, cardiac dysrhythmias, and complica￾tions of immobility.
Nursing interventions
Improving Mobility and Preventing Deformities
Position to prevent contractures; use measures to relieve 
pressure, assist in maintaining good body alignment, and 
prevent compressive neuropathies.
75 | P a g e
Apply a splint at night to prevent flexion of affected ex￾tremity.
Prevent adduction of the affected shoulder with a pillow 
placed in the axilla.
Elevate affected arm to prevent edema and fibrosis.
Position fingers so that they are barely flexed; place hand 
in slight supination. If upper extremity spasticity is noted, 
do not use a hand roll; dorsal wrist splint may be used
Change position every 2 hours; place patient in a prone 
position for 15 to 30 minutes several times a day.
Establishing an Exercise Program
76 | P a g e
Provide full range of motion four or five times a day to 
maintain joint mobility, regain motor control, prevent 
contractures in the paralyzed extremity, prevent further 
deterioration of the neuromuscular system, and enhance 
circulation. 
Exercise is helpful in preventing venous stasis, which 
may predispose the patient to thrombosis and pulmonary 
embolus.
Preparing for Ambulation
Start an active rehabilitation program when conscious￾ness returns (and all evidence of bleeding is gone, when 
77 | P a g e
indicated).
Teach patient to maintain balance in a sitting position, 
then to balance while standing (use a tilt table if needed)
Assisting with Nutrition
Observe patient for paroxysms of coughing, food dribbling 
out or pooling in one side of the mouth, food retained for 
long periods in the mouth, or nasal regurgitation when 
swallowing liquids.
Consult with speech therapist to evaluate gag reflexes; 
Have patient sit upright, preferably on chair, when eating 
and drinking; advance diet as tolerated.
78 | P a g e
Prepare for GI feedings through a tube if indicated; mon￾itor and report excessive retained or residual feeding.
Attaining Bowel and Bladder Control
Performggintermittent sterile catheterization during pe￾riod of loss of sphincter control.
Analyze voiding pattern and offer urinal or bedpan on pa￾tient’s voiding schedule.
Assist the male patient to an upright posture for voiding.
Provide high-fiber diet and adequate fluid intake (2 to 3 
L/day), unless contraindicated.
Establish a regular time (after breakfast) for toileting.
79 | P a g e
Maintaining Skin Integrity
Frequently assess skin for signs of breakdown, with em￾phasis on bony areas and dependent body parts.
Employ pressure-relieving devices; continue regular 
turn- ing and positioning (every 2 hours minimally); min￾imize shear and friction when positioning.
Keep skin clean and dry, gently massage healthy dry skin, 
and maintain adequate nutrition.
80 | P a g e
III. INTRACRANIAL ANEURYSM
 An aneurysm is a localized sac or dilation formed at a weak 
point in the wall of the artery. An intracranial (cerebral) an￾eurysm is a dilation of the walls of a cerebral artery that 
develops as a result of weakness in the arterial wall. 
 Its cause is unknown, but it may be due to atherosclerosis, 
a congenital defect of the vessel walls, hypertensive vascu￾lar disease, head trauma, or advancing age.
81 | P a g e
82 | P a g e
Intracranial aneurysm CT -MRI angiography
83 | P a g e
Clinical Manifestations
 Neurologic deficits (similar to those of ischemic stroke)
 Rupture of the aneurysm causes sudden, unusually severe 
headache; often, loss of consciousness for a variable pe￾riod; pain and rigidity of the back of the neck and spine; 
and visual disturbances (visual loss, diplopia, ptosis). Tin￾nitus, dizziness, and hemiparesis may also occur.
 If the aneurysm leaks blood and forms a clot, patient may 
show little neurologic deficit or may have severe bleeding, 
resulting in cerebral damage followed rapidly by coma and 
death.
84 | P a g e
Assessment and Diagnostic Methods
 CT scan or MRI, and cerebral angiography, 
 Lumbar puncture can be used to diagnose and confirm an 
aneurysm.
Medical Management
 Allow the brain to recover from the initial insult (bleeding).
 Prevent or minimize the risk of rebleeding.
85 | P a g e
 Prevent or treat other complications: rebleeding, cerebral 
vasospasm, acute hydrocephalus, and seizures.
 Provide bed rest with sedation to prevent agitation and 
stress.
 Manage vasospasm with calcium channel blockers, such as 
nimodipine (Nimotop). Endovascular techniques may also 
be used.
 Administer supplemental oxygen and maintain the hemo￾globin and hematocrit at acceptable levels to assist in 
maintaining tissue oxygenation.
86 | P a g e
 Institute surgical treatment (arterial bypass) or medical 
treatment to prevent rebleeding.
 Manage increased intracranial pressure (ICP) by draining 
the CSF via ventricular catheter drainage.
 Administer mannitol to reduce ICP, and monitor for signs 
of dehydration and rebound elevation of ICP.
 Administer antifibrinolytic agents to delay or prevent dis￾solution of the clot if surgery is delayed or contraindicated.
 Manage systemic hypertension with antihypertensive ther￾apy, arterial hemodynamic monitoring, and stool softeners 
to prevent straining and elevation of blood pressure.
87 | P a g e
Nursing Interventions
Improving Cerebral Tissue Perfusion
 Monitor closely for neurologic deterioration, and maintain 
a neurologic flow record.
 Check blood pressure, pulse, level of consciousness, pupil￾lary responses, and motor function hourly; monitor respir￾atory status and report changes immediately.
 Implement aneurysm precautions (immediate and absolute 
bed rest in a quiet, nonstressful setting; restrict visitors, 
except for family).
88 | P a g e
 Elevate the head of bed 15 to 30 degrees or as ordered.
 Avoid any activity that suddenly increases blood pressure 
or obstructs venous return (eg, Valsalva maneuver, strain￾ing), instruct patient to exhale during voiding or defecation 
to decrease strain, eliminate caffeine, administer all per￾sonal care, and minimize external stimuli.
 Apply antiembolism stockings or sequential compression 
devices. Observe legs for signs and symptoms of deep vein 
thrombosis tenderness, redness, swelling, warmth, and 
edema.
89 | P a g e
Relieving Sensory Deprivation
 Keep sensory stimulation to a minimum.
 Explain restrictions to help reduce patient’s sense of isola￾tion.
Relieving Anxiety
 Inform patient of plan of care.
 Provide support and appropriate reassurance to patient 
and family.
90 | P a g e
Monitoring and Managing Potential Complications
 Assess for and immediately report signs of possible vaso￾spasm, which may occur several days after surgery or on 
the initiation of treatment (intensified headaches, de￾creased level of responsiveness, or evidence of aphasia or 
partial paralysis). Also administer calcium channel block￾ers or fluid-volume expanders as prescribed.
 Maintain seizure precautions. Also maintain airway and 
prevent injury if a seizure occurs. Administer antiseizure 
medications as prescribed (phenytoin [Dilantin] is medica￾tion of choice).
91 | P a g e
 Monitor for and report symptoms of aneurysm rebleeding. 
Rebleeding occurs most often in the first 2 weeks. 
 Symptoms include sudden severe headache, nausea, vom￾iting, decreased level of consciousness, and neurologic def￾icit. Administer medications as ordered.
 Hyponatremia: monitor laboratory data often because hy￾ponatremia (serum sodium level under 135 mEq/L) affects 
up to 30% of patients. 
Teaching Patients Self-Care
92 | P a g e
 Provide patient and family with information to promote co￾operation with the care and required activity restrictions 
and prepare them for patient’s return home. 
 Identify the causes of intracranial hemorrhage, its possible 
consequences, and the medical or surgical treatments that 
are implemented. 
 Discuss the importance of interventions taken to prevent 
and detect complications (eg, aneurysm precautions, close 
monitoring of patient). 
93 | P a g e
4. HEAD INJURY
Injuries to the head involve trauma to the scalp, skull,and 
brain.
A head injury may lead to conditions ranging from mild con￾cussion to coma and death; the most serious form is known 
as a traumatic brain injury (TBI). 
94 | P a g e
95 | P a g e
96 | P a g e
Clinical Manifestations
Persistent, localized pain usually suggests fracture.
Fractures of the cranial vault may or may not produce 
swelling in that region.
Drainage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from the ears and the 
nose suggests basal skull fracture.
Fractures of the base of the skull frequently produce hem￾orrhage from the nose, pharynx, or ears, and blood may 
appear under the conjunctiva.
Bloody spinal fluid suggests brain laceration or contusion.
Drainage of CSF may cause serious infection (eg, meningi￾tis) through a tear in the dura mater.
97 | P a g e
Ecchymosis may be seen over the mastoid (Battle’s sign).
Brain injury may have various signs, including;
Altered level of consciousness (LOC),
Pupillary abnormalities, 
Altered or absent gag reflex or corneal reflex, 
Neurologic deficits, 
Change in vital signs (eg, respiration pattern, 
Hypertension, 
Bradycardia), 
Hyperthermia or hypothermia, and 
Sensory, vision, or hearing impairment.
Signs of a postconcussion syndrome may include.
98 | P a g e
headache, 
dizziness, anxiety, 
irritability, and lethargy.
In acute or subacute subdural hematoma, changes in LOC, 
pupillary signs, hemiparesis, coma, hypertension, brady￾cardia, and slowing respiratory rate are signs of expanding 
mass.
Chronic subdural hematoma may result in severe head￾ache, alternating focal neurologic signs, personality 
changes, mental deterioration, and focal seizures.
99 | P a g e
Assessment and Diagnostic Methods
Physical examination and evaluationaofaneurologic status
• Radiographic studies: x-rays, CT, MRI
• Cerebral angiography
Scalp and Skull Injuries
• Scalp trauma may result in an abrasion (brush wound), 
contusion, laceration, or hematoma. 
100 | P a g e
• Fracture of the skull is a break in the continuity of the 
skull caused by forceful trauma. Fractures may occur with 
or without damage to the brain. 
They are classified as simple, comminuted, depressed, or bas￾ilar and may be open (dura is torn) or closed (dura is not 
torn).
Medical Management
• Non depressed skull fractures generally do not require 
surgical treatment but require close observation of patient.
101 | P a g e
• Depressed skull fractures usually require surgery with el￾evation of the skull and debridement, usually within 24 
hours of 
Types of head injuries
1. Concussion (traumatic Brain Injury)
A cerebral concussion after head injury is a temporary loss 
of neurologic function with no apparent structural damage.
It may or may not produce a brief loss of consciousness.
102 | P a g e
In most cases, CT scans of concussed patients do not show 
any abnormal findings, even if the patient is experiencing 
clear signs of concussion, such as dizziness, nausea, 
and headaches. Above is a normal brain CT scan of concussed 
patient
103 | P a g e
Causes of injury is usually blunt trauma from
Acceleration–deceleration force, 
Direct blow, or 
Blast injury. 
Nursing Management
• Give information, explanations, and encouragement to 
reduce post concussion syndrome.
• Instruct family to look for the following signs and notify 
physician or clinic: 
difficulty in awakening or speaking. 
104 | P a g e
Confusion, 
severe headache, 
vomiting, and 
weakness of one side of the body.
2. Contusion
A cerebral contusion is a moderate to severe head injury in 
which the brain is bruised and damaged in a specific area 
because of severe acceleration–deceleration force or blunt 
trauma. 
105 | P a g e
Contusions are characterized by loss of consciousness asso￾ciated with stupor and confusion. 
 
106 | P a g e
Brain CT scan showing contusion
107 | P a g e
Human Cadaver: brain image showing 
cerebral contusion
108 | P a g e
3. Diffuse Axonal Injury
 It happens when the brain rapidly shifts inside the skull as 
an injury is occurring. The long connecting fibers in the 
brain called axons are sheared as the brain rapidly accel￾erates and decelerates inside the hard bone of the skull.
 It results from shearing and rotational forces that produce 
damage throughout the brain to axons in the cerebral hem￾ispheres, corpus callosum, and brain stem. 
 Diagnosis is made by clinical signs and a CT or MRI scan.
109 | P a g e
 
Brain MRI diffuse axonal injury
110 | P a g e
111 | P a g e
Intracranial Hemorrhage
Hematomas are collections of blood in the brain that may be 
epidural (above the dura), subdural (below the dura), or in￾tracerebral (within the brain). 
Intracerebral
112 | P a g e
113 | P a g e
Types of intercranial Hemorrhage
1. Epidural Hematoma (Extradural Hematoma or Hemor￾rhage)
 Blood collects in the epidural space between the skull and 
dura mater. Symptoms are caused by the pressure of the 
expanding hematoma.
Medical Management
This is an extreme emergency because marked neurologic 
deficit or respiratory arrest may occur within minutes. 
114 | P a g e
Bur holes are made to remove the clots, and the bleeding 
point is controlled (craniotomy, drain insertion).
2. Subdural Hematoma
Blood collects between the dura and the underlying brain 
and is more frequently venous in origin. 
The most common cause is trauma, but it may also be asso￾ciated with various bleeding tendencies (coagulopathies) or 
rupture of an aneurysm.
115 | P a g e
3. Intracerebral Hemorrhage and Hematoma
Bleeding occurs into the substance of the brain. 
Hematoma is commonly seen when forces are exerted to the 
head over a small area (missile injuries or bullet wounds; 
stab injury). 
It may also result from systemic hypertension causing de￾generation and rupture of a vessel, and rupture of a saccular 
aneurysm. 
Medical Management for head injuries
116 | P a g e
From the scene of the injury, the patient is transported on 
a board, with head and neck maintained in alignment with 
the axis of the body. 
Apply a cervical collar and maintain it until cervical spine 
x-rays have been obtained and the absence of cervical spi￾nal cord injury documented. 
Managementbinvolves control of ICP, supportive care (eg, 
ventilatory support, seizure prevention, fluid and electro￾lyteamaintenance, nutritional support, and management of 
pain and anxiety), or craniotomy.
117 | P a g e
Increased ICP is managed by adequate oxygenation, man￾nitolnadministration, ventilatorymsupport, hyperventila￾tion, elevation of the head of the bed, maintenance of fluid 
and electrolytedbalance, nutritional support, pain and anx￾iety management, or neurosurgery.
See “Medical Management” and “Nursing Process” under 
“IncreasedmIntracranial Pressure” for additional infor￾mation.
Assessment for pt with TBI
118 | P a g e
Obtain health history, including time of injury, cause of in￾jury, direction and force of the blow, loss of consciousness, 
and condition following injury. 
Detailed neurologic information (LOC, ability to respond to 
verbal commands if patient is conscious), response to tactile 
stimuli (if patient is unconscious), pupillary response to 
light, corneal and gag reflexes, 
Monitoring Vital Signs
Monitor patient at frequent intervals to assess intracranial 
status.
119 | P a g e
Assess for increasing ICP, including slowing of pulse, in￾creasing systolic pressure, and widening pulse pressure. 
Evaluate spontaneous eye opening.
Evaluate size of pupils and reaction to light (unilaterally 
dilated and poorly responding pupils may indicate develop￾ing hematoma). If both pupils are fixed and dilated, it usu￾ally indicates overwhelming injury and poor prognosis.
Nursing Interventions
Maintaining the Airway
120 | P a g e
Position the unconscious patient to facilitate drainage of 
secretions; elevate the head of bed 30 degrees to decrease 
intracranial venous pressure.
Establish effective suctioning procedures.
Guard against aspiration and respiratory insufficiency.
Monitor arterial blood gases (ABGs) to assess adequacy of 
ventilation.
Monitor patient on mechanical ventilation for pulmonary 
complications (acute respiratory distress syndrome 
[ARDS] and pneumonia).
Maintaining Fluid and Electrolyte Balance
121 | P a g e
Fluid and electrolyte balance is particularly important in 
patients receiving osmotic diuretic..
Record daily weights (which may indicate fluid loss from 
diabetes insipidus).
Promoting Adequate Nutrition
Parenteral nutrition (PN) via a central line or enteral feedings 
administered via a nasogastric or nasojejunal feeding tube 
may be used.
 Monitor laboratory values closely in patients receiving 
PN.
 Elevate the head of the bed and aspirate the enteral 
122 | P a g e
tube for evidence of residual feeding before administering 
additional feedings to help prevent distention, regurgita￾tion, and aspiration.
 Continue enteral or parenteral feedings until the swal￾lowing reflex returns and the patient can meet caloric re￾quirements orally.
Preventing Injury
Observe for restlessness, which may be due to hypoxia, 
fever, pain, or a full bladder. 
Avoid restraints when possible because straining can in￾crease ICP.
123 | P a g e
Protect patient from injury (padded side rails, hands 
wrapped in mitts).
Avoid using opioids for restlessness because they depress 
respiration, constrict pupils, and alter LOC.
Keep environmental stimuli to a minimum.
Provide adequate lighting to prevent visual hallucinations.
Minimize disruption of patient’s sleep/wake cycles.
Use an external sheath catheter for incontinence because 
an indwelling catheter may produce infection.
Avoid bladder distention.
Maintaining Body Temperature
124 | P a g e
Monitor temperature every 2 to 4 hours.
If temperature rises, try to identify the cause and adminis￾ter acetaminophen and cooling blankets as prescribed to 
achieve normothermia.
Monitor for infection related to fever.
Maintaining Skin Integrity
Assess all body surfaces, and document skin integrity 
every 8 hours.
Lubricate the patient’s skin with oil or emollient lotion to 
prevent irritation due to rubbing against the sheet.
Turn patient and reposition every 2 hours.
125 | P a g e
Provide skin care every 4 hours.
Assist patient to get out of bed three times a day (when 
appropriate).
Improving Cognitive Functioning
Develop patient’s ability to devise problem-solving strate￾gies through cognitive rehabilitation over time; use a mul￾tidisciplinary approach.
Preventing Sleep Pattern Disturbance
Group nursing activities so that patient is disturbed less 
frequently.
Decrease environmental noise, and dim room lights.
126 | P a g e
Provide strategies (eg, back rubs) to increase comfort.
Monitoring and Managing Potential Complications
Take measures to control CPP (eg, elevate the head of the 
bed and increase intravenous [IV] fluids).
Take measures to control ICP refer mnx of ICP.
Monitor for a patent airway, altered breathing pattern, 
and hypoxemia and pneumonia. Assist with intubation 
and mechanical ventilation.
Assess carefully for development of posttraumatic sei￾zures.
127 | P a g e
B. SPINAL CORD INJURY
 Damage to the spinal cord ranges from transient concus￾sion (patient recovers fully), to contusion, laceration, and 
compression of the cord substance (either alone or in com￾bination), to complete transection of the cord (paralysis be￾low the level of injury).
 In cases where a spinal cord injury caused paralysis of the 
limbs, there can be varying levels of damage and disability. 
128 | P a g e
129 | P a g e
130 | P a g e
PARAPLEGIA
 Paraplegia is caused by an injury of the spine at a site be￾low the neck, below the first thoracic spinal nerve and 
within the sacral lumbar regions. 
 With an injury in this region, sufferers usually lose all feel￾ing and movement in their legs but have full control of 
movement in their arms.
HEMIPLEGIA
 Hemiplegia (also known as hemiparalysis) is a condition 
caused by an injury to the brain. Like a stroke, hemiplegia 
131 | P a g e
only affects one side of the brain; therefore, its effects are 
usually down one side of the body. As with all brain injury, 
the effects can be non-physical as well as physical. 
 Hemiplegia can be caused by trauma, an infection (such as 
meningitis or encephalitis), a systemic disorder (such as 
leukaemia) or hypertension (high blood pressure) in the 
heart. 
QUADRIPLEGIA
 Quadriplegia (sometimes referred to as tetraplegia) is usu￾ally caused by an injury high up in the spinal cord, usually 
132 | P a g e
in the neck region. 
 This results in loss of motor control below and, sometimes 
including, the neck. As you would expect, the more severe 
the injury, the worse the outcome. 
 Usually a patient will lose all sensory function below the 
neck as well. 
 Sufferers of paraplegia and quadriplegia need extra care, as 
damage to the central nervous system can have effects be￾yond paralysis. 
 For instance, patients often experience a loss of control of 
the function of the bowel and bladder. 
133 | P a g e
 As patients will typically not be able to feel pain, infections 
such as urinary tract infections can set in unnoticed which 
can become life-threatening. 
 Numbness to external pain can also manifest in pressure 
sores, burns and skin conditions, which are always a high 
risk to a patient who is immobile. 
 The lack of movement in the legs and in other parts of the 
body put the patient at increased risk of blood clots.
Clinical Manifestations of spinal cord injury.
134 | P a g e
The consequences of SCI depend on the type and level of in￾jury of the cord.
Neurologic Level
Total sensory and motor paralysis below the neurologic 
level.
Loss of bladder and bowel control (usually with urinary 
retention and bladder distention).
Loss of sweating and vasomotor tone.
Marked reduction of BP from loss of peripheral vascular 
resistance.
If conscious, patient reports acute pain in back or neck; 
135 | P a g e
patient may speak of fear that the neck or back is broken.
Respiratory Problems
Related to compromised respiratory function; severity de￾pends on level of injury.
Acute respiratory failure is the leading cause of death in 
high cervical cord injury.
Assessment and Diagnostic Methods
 Detailed neurologic examination
 x-ray examinations (lateral cervical spine x-rays), 
 Computed tomography (CT), 
136 | P a g e
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and 
 ECG (bradycardia and asystole are common in acute spi￾nal injuries) Complications.
 Spinal shock, a serious complication of SCI, is a sudden 
depression of reflex activity in the spinal cord (areflexia) 
below the level of injury.
 The muscles innervated by the part of the cord segment 
situated below the level of the lesion becomeaacompletely 
paralyzed and flaccid, and the reflexes are absent.
 BP and heart rate fall as vital organs are affected. Parts of 
the body below the level of the cord lesion are paralyzed 
and without sensation.
137 | P a g e
Emergency Management
Improper handling can cause further damage and loss of 
neurologic function..
Initial care includes rapid assessment, immobilization, 
stabilization or control of life-threatening injuries, and 
transportation to an appropriate medical facility.
Maintain patient in an extended position (not sitting); no 
body part should be twisted or turned.
The standard of care is referral to a regional spinal injury 
center or trauma center for treatment in first 24 hours.
138 | P a g e
Medical Management
Acute Phase
The patient is resuscitated as necessary, and oxygenation 
and cardiovascular stability are maintained.
High-dose corticosteroids (methylprednisolone) may be 
administered to counteract spinal cord edema.
Oxygen is administered to maintain a high arterial PaO2. 
For patients with high cervical spine injuries requires im￾mobilization, reduction of dislocations, and stabilization 
of the vertebral column.
139 | P a g e
Management of Complications
Spinal and Neurogenic Shock
Intestinal decompression is used to treat bowel distention 
and paralytic ileus caused by depression of reflexes. 
Patient who does not perspire on paralyzed portion of 
body requires close observation for early detection of an 
abrupt onset of fever.
Body defenses are maintained and supported until the 
spinal shock abates and the system has recovered from 
the traumatic insult (up to 4 months).
Special attention is paid to the respiratory system (may 
140 | P a g e
not be enough intrathoracic pressure to cough effec￾tively). Special problems include decreased vital capacity, 
decreased oxygen levels, and pulmonary edema.
Chest physiotherapy and suctioning are implemented to 
help clear pulmonary secretions. Patient is monitored for 
respiratory complications (respiratory failure, pneumo￾nia).
Deep Vein Thrombosis and Other Complications
Patient is observed for deep vein thrombosis (DVT), a 
com- plication of immobility (eg, pulmonary embolism). 
Symptoms
141 | P a g e
Low-dose anticoagulation therapy is initiated to prevent 
DVT and pulmonary embolism, along with the use of an￾tiembolism stockings 
Patient is monitored for autonomic hyperreflexia (charac￾ter- ized by pounding headache, profuse sweating, nasal 
congestion, bradycardia, and hypertension).
Constant surveillance is maintained for signs and symp￾toms of pressure ulcers and infection (urinary, respira￾tory, local infection at pin sites).
Nursing Interventions
Promoting Adequate Breathing and Airway Clearance
142 | P a g e
Detect potential respiratory failure by observing patient, 
measuring vital capacity, and monitoring oxygen satura￾tion through pulse oximetry and arterial blood gas values.
Prevent retention of secretions and resultant atelectasis 
with early and vigorous attention to clearing bronchial 
and pharyngeal secretions.
Suction with caution, because this procedure can stimu￾late the vagus nerve, producing bradycardia and cardiac 
arrest.
Initiate chest physical therapy and assisted coughing to 
mobilize secretions if the patient cannot cough effectively.
Ensure proper humidification and hydration to maintain 
143 | P a g e
thin secretions.
Assess for signs of respiratory infection: cough, fever, and 
dyspnea.
Monitor respiratory status frequently.
Improving Mobility
Maintain proper body alignment at all times.
Reposition the patient frequently and assist patient out 
of bed as soon as the spinal column is stabilized.
Apply splints (various types) to prevent footdrop and tro￾chanter rolls to prevent external rotation of the hip joints; 
reapply every 2 hours.
144 | P a g e
Patients with lesions above the midthoracic level may tol￾erate changes in position poorly; monitor BP when posi￾tions are changed.
Do not turn patient who is not on a rotating specialty bed 
unless physician indicates that it is safe to do so.
Perform passive range-of-motion exercises as soon as 
possible after injury to avoid complications such as con￾tractures and atrophy.
Provide a full range of motion at least four or five times 
daily to toes, metatarsals, ankles, knees, and hips.
Promoting Adaptation to Disturbed Sensory Perception
145 | P a g e
Stimulate the area above the level of the injury through 
touch, aromas, flavorful food and beverages, conversa￾tion, and music.
Provide prism glasses to enable patient to see from supine 
position.
Encourage use of hearing aids, if applicable.
Provide emotional support; teach patient strategies to 
compensate for or cope with sensory deficits.
Maintaining Skin Integrity
Change patient’s position every 2 hours, and inspect the 
skin, particularly under cervical collar.
146 | P a g e
Assess for redness or breaks in skin over pressure points; 
check perineum for soilage; observe catheter for adequate 
drainage; assess general body alignment and comfort.
Wash skin every few hours with a mild soap, rinse well, 
and blot dry. Keep pressure-sensitive areas well lubri￾cated and soft with bland cream or lotion.
Maintaining Urinary Elimination
Performbbintermittent catheterization to avoid over￾stretch- ing the bladder and infection. If this is not feasi￾ble, insert an indwelling catheter.
147 | P a g e
Improving Bowel Function
Monitor reactions to gastric intubation.
Provide a high-calorie, high-protein, and high-fiber diet..
Administer prescribed stool softener to counteract effects 
of immobility and analgesic agents, and institute a bowel 
program as early as possible.
148 | P a g e
C. SPINAL DISC PROBLEMS
Hypertrophy/expansion of degenerative tissues
Common sources include ligamentum flavum and the facet 
joint. The facet joint itself undergoes degenerative changes 
(just like any other joint in the body), and synovial hypertro￾phy and/or associated cysts can compromise surrounding 
nerve roots.
149 | P a g e
150 | P a g e
Sagittal image of hypointensity magnetic resonance imaging 
shows hypertrophy ligamentum flavum.
151 | P a g e
Disc Herniation 
 A herniated disc is a condition affecting the spine in 
which the annulus fibrosus is damaged enabling the nu￾cleus pulposus (which is normally located within the cen￾ter of the disc) to herniate. 
 This can compress the nerves or spinal cord causing pain 
and spinal cord dysfunction.
152 | P a g e
153 | P a g e
MRI IMAGE
154 | P a g e
Etiology
 The most common cause of disc herniation is a degenera￾tive process in which, as humans age, the nucleus pulpo￾sus becomes less hydrated and weakens. 
 This process will lead to a progressive disc herniation that 
can cause symptoms. 
 The second most common cause of disc herniation is 
trauma. 
 Other causes include connective tissue disorders and con￾genital disorders such as short pedicles. 
 Disc herniation is most common in the lumbar spine, fol￾lowed by the cervical spine. 
155 | P a g e
Signs and symptoms
Cervical spine
 Neck, shoulder, and scapula pain, lateral arm numbness, 
and weakness during shoulder abduction.
 The reflexes affected are the biceps and brachioradialis.
 Weakness on the elbow and wrist are common, along with 
weakness during radial extension.
Thoracic Spine
 Intervertebral disc degeneration often causes thoracic dis￾cogenic pain syndrome. 
156 | P a g e
 Thoracic disc lesions mostly affect the lower part of the tho￾racic spine. Three-quarters of incidence occurs below T8, 
and T11-T12 are most common.
 Patients may have sensory changes. Serious findings in￾clude gait disturbances, paralysis, cardiovascular abnor￾malities.
lumbar spine
 Pain and sensory loss are common in the inguinal region. 
Hip flexion weakness is rare, and no stretch reflex is af￾fected.
 In case of the first sacral Nerve (S1)- sensory loss on the 
157 | P a g e
posterior calf, lateral or plantar aspect of foot; 
 weakness on hip extension, knee flexion, plantar flexion 
of the foot; Achilles tendon; 
 Medial buttock, perineal, and perianal region; weakness 
may be minimal, with urinary and fecal incontinence as 
well as sexual dysfunction.
Diagnosis
X-rays: 
CT Scan
MRI 
158 | P a g e
Treatment / Management
Conservative Treatments
 Acute cervical and lumbar radiculopathies due to a her￾niated disc are primarily managed with non-surgical 
treatments. 
 NSAIDs and physical therapy are first-line treatment mo￾dalities. 
 Most cases of disc herniation resolve within a few weeks 
after the onset of symptoms; thus, it is not recommended 
to start physical therapy until symptoms have lasted for 
at least three weeks. 
159 | P a g e
 Patients who fail conservative treatment or patients with 
neurological deficits need timely surgical consultation. 
 Muscle relaxers such as cyclobenzaprine or oral cortico￾steroids are used to manage chronic pain and discomfort 
and also prevent oedema and cord compression.
 For cases of severe pain unresponsive to over-the-counter 
pain medication, opioid analgesics are warranted. 
 Translaminar epidural injections and selective nerve root 
blocks are the second-line modalities for patients unre￾sponsive to conservative management and who have had 
symptoms for at least four to six weeks. 
160 | P a g e
Surgical Treatments
For Hypertrophy/expansion of degenerative tissues
 Lumbar discectomy with fusion: Fusion has been consid￾ered for a long time as the gold standard for the manage￾ment of lumbar degenerative disc disease.
 Lumbar total disc replacement: The main indication is a 
single-level disc disease with disease-free facet joints.
For Disc Herniation 
 Surgical procedures for a herniated disc include laminec￾tomies with discectomies depending on the cervical or 
161 | P a g e
lumbar area. 
 Also, a patient with a herniated disc in the cervical spine 
can be managed via an anterior approach that requires 
anterior cervical decompression and fusion. 
 An artificial disk replacement option can be considered. 
 Other alternative surgical procedures to the lumbar spine 
include a lateral or anterior approach that requires com￾plete discectomy and fusion. 
162 | P a g e
CHRONIC NEUROLOGICAL CONDI￾TIONS 
SEIZURE DISORDER (EPILEPSY)
 Epilepsies are symptom of several disorders of brain func￾tion characterized by recurring seizures.
 There may be associated loss of consciousness, excess 
movement, or loss of muscle tone or movement and dis￾turbances of behavior, mood, sensation, and perception. 
163 | P a g e
 The basic problem is an electrical disturbance (dysrhyth￾mia) in the nerve cells in one section of the brain, causing 
them to emit abnormal, recurring, uncontrolled electrical 
discharges. 
 Epilepsies often follow many medical disorders, traumas, 
and drug or alcohol intoxication. They are also associated 
with brain tumors, abscesses, and congenital malfor￾mations. 
164 | P a g e
165 | P a g e
Clinical Manifestations
Seizures range from simple staring episodes to prolonged 
convulsive movements with loss of consciousness. Sei￾zures are classified as partial, generalized, and unclassi￾fied according to the area of brain involved. 
Aura, a premonitory or warning sensation, may occur be￾fore a seizure (eg, seeing a flashing light, hearing a 
sound).
Simple Partial Seizures
Only a finger or hand may shake; 
the mouth may jerk uncontrollably; 
166 | P a g e
the patient may talk unintelligibly, 
may be dizzy, or may experience unusual or unpleasant 
sights, 
sounds, odors, or taste all with out loss of consciousness.
Complex Partial Seizures
The patient remains motionless or moves automatically 
but inappropriately for time and place; may express fear, 
anger, elation, or irritability; and does not remember epi￾sode when it is over.
Generalized Seizures (Grand Mal Seizures)
167 | P a g e
Generalized seizures involve both hemispheres of the brain.
There is intense rigidity of the entire body, followed by 
alter- nations of muscle relaxation and contraction (gen￾eralized tonic–clonic contraction).
Simultaneous contractions of diaphragm and chest mus￾cles produce characteristic epileptic cry.
Tongue is chewed; patient is incontinent of urine and 
stool.
Convulsive movements last 1 or 2 minutes.
The patient then relaxes and lies in a deep coma, breath￾ing noisily.
168 | P a g e
Postictal State
After the seizure, patients are often confused and hard to 
arouse and may sleep for hours. Many complain of head￾ache, sore muscles, fatigue, and depression.
Assessment and Diagnostic Methods
Developmental history and physical and neurologic ex￾aminations are done to determine the type, frequency, 
and severity of seizures.
Biochemical, hematologic, and serologic studies are in￾cluded.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is performed to detect 
169 | P a g e
structural lesions.
Electroencephalograms (EEGs) aid in classifying the type 
of seizure.
Single photon emission CT (SPECT) may be used to iden￾tify the epileptogenic zone.
Medical Management
The goals of treatment are to stop the seizures as quickly 
as possible, to ensure adequate cerebral oxygenation, and 
to maintain a seizure-free state.
An airway and adequate oxygenation (intubate if neces￾sary) are established, as is an IV line for administering 
170 | P a g e
medications and obtaining blood samples for analysis.
Pharmacologic Therapy
Medications are used to achieve seizure control. The 
usual treatment is single-drug therapy.
IV diazepam, lorazepam, or fosphenytoin is administered 
slowly in an attempt to halt the seizures. 
General anesthesia with a short-acting barbiturate may 
be used if initial treatment is unsuccessful.
To maintain a seizure-free state, other medications 
(phenytoin, phenobarbital) are prescribed after the initial 
seizure is treated.
171 | P a g e
Surgical Management
Surgery is indicated when epilepsy results from intracra￾nial tumors, abscesses, cysts, or vascular anomalies.
Status Epilepticus
 Status epilepticus (acute prolonged seizure activity) is a 
series of generalized seizures that occur without full re￾covery of consciousness between attacks. 
 The condition is a medical emergency that is character￾ized by continuous clinical or electrical seizures lasting at 
least 30 minutes.
172 | P a g e
 Repeated episodes of cerebral anoxia and edema may 
lead to irreversible and fatal brain damage. 
 Common factors that precipitate status epilepticus in￾clude withdrawal of antiseizure medication, fever, and 
concurrent infection.
Assessment
Obtain a complete seizure history. Ask about factors or 
events that precipitate the seizures; document alcohol in￾take.
Determine whether the patient has an aura before an ep-
173 | P a g e
ileptic seizure, which may indicate the origin of the sei￾zure (eg, seeing a flashing light may indicate that the sei￾zure originated in the occipital lobe).
Observe and assess neurologic condition during and after 
a seizure. 
Assess vital and neurologic signs continuously. Patient 
may die from cardiac involvement or respiratory depres￾sion.
Planning and Goals
Major goals include prevention of injury, control of seizures, 
achievement of a satisfactory psychosocial adjustment.
174 | P a g e
Nursing Interventions
General Care and Injury Prevention
Monitor the seizure type and general condition of patient.
Turn patient to side-lying position to assist in draining 
pharyngeal secretions.
Have suction equipment available if patient aspirates.
Monitor IV line closely for dislodgment during seizures.
Protect patient from injury during seizures with padded 
side rails, and keep under constant observation.
Do not restrain patient’s movements during seizure activ￾ity. Do not insert anything in patient’s mouth.
175 | P a g e
Reducing Fear of Seizures
Reduce fear that a seizure may occur unexpectedly by en￾couraging compliance with prescribed treatment.
Encourage patient to follow a regular and moderate rou￾tine in lifestyle, diet (avoiding excessive stimulants), exer￾cise, and rest (regular sleep patterns).
Encourage patient to attend classes on stress manage￾ment.
Improving Coping Mechanisms
176 | P a g e
Provide counseling to patient and family to help them un￾derstand the condition and limitations imposed.
Encourage patient to participate in social and recrea￾tional activities.
Teach patient and family about symptoms and their man￾agement.
177 | P a g e
CHRONIC DEGENERATIVE DISOR￾DERS
A. MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
 Also called Disseminated sclerosis
 Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic, degenerative, progres￾sive disease of the central nervous system (CNS) character￾ized by small patches of demyelination in the brain and spi￾nal cord.
178 | P a g e
 Demyelination (destruction of myelin) results in im￾paired transmission of nerve impulses.
 
179 | P a g e
180 | P a g e
Pathophysiology
 The cause of MS is not known, but a defective immune re￾sponse probably plays a major role. In MS, sensitized T 
cells inhabit the CNS and facilitate the infiltration of other 
agents that damage the immune system.
 The immune system attack leads to inflammation that de￾stroys myelin and oligoden- droglial cells that produce my￾elin in the CNS. 
 Plaques of sclerotic tissue appear on demyelinated axons, 
further interrupting the transmission of impulses.
Clinical Manifestations
181 | P a g e
Signs and symptoms are varied and multiple and reflect 
the location of the lesion (plaque) or combination of le￾sions.
Primary symptoms: fatigue, depression, weakness, 
numbness, difficulty in coordination, loss of balance, and 
pain.
Visual disturbances: blurring of vision, diplopia (double 
vision), patchy blindness (scotoma), and total blindness.
Spastic weakness of the extremities and loss of ab￾dominal reflexes; ataxia and tremor.
Cognitive and psychosocial problems; depression, emo￾tional lability, and euphoria.
182 | P a g e
Bladder, bowel, and sexual problems possible.
Secondary Manifestations Related to Complications
Urinary tract infections, constipation
Pressure ulcers, contracture deformities, dependent pe￾dal edema
Pneumonia
Reactive depressions and osteoporosis
Emotional, social, marital, economic, and vocational 
problems
Assessment and Diagnostic Findings
MRI (primary diagnostic tool) to visualize small plaques
183 | P a g e
Electrophoresis study of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF); 
abnormal immunoglobulin G antibody (oligoclonal bond￾ing)
Evoked potential studies and urodynamic studies
Neuropsychological testing as indicated to assess cogni￾tive impairment
Sexual history to identify changes in sexual function
Medical Management
Because no cure exists for MS, the goals of treatment are 
to delay the progression of the disease, manage chronic 
symptoms, and treat acute exacerbations. 
184 | P a g e
An individualized treatment program is indicated to re￾lieve symptoms and provide support.
Management strategies target the various motor and sen￾sory symptoms and effects of immobility that can occur. 
Radiation therapy may be used to induce immunosup￾pression.
Pharmacologic Therapy
Disease Modification
Interferon beta-1a (Rebif) and interferon beta-1b (Be￾taseron) are administered subcutaneously. Another prep￾aration of
185 | P a g e
interferon beta-1a, Avonex, is administered intramuscu￾larly once a week.
Glatiramer acetate (Copaxone) to reduce the rate of re￾lapse in the RR course of MS; administered subcutane￾ously daily.
IV methylprednisolone to treat acute relapse in the re￾laps- ing remitting course.
Mitoxantrone (Novantrone) is administered via IV infu￾sion every 3 months for patients with secondary-progres￾sive or worsening relapsing-remitting MS.
Symptom Management
186 | P a g e
Baclofen (Lioresal) is the medication of choice for treating 
spasticity; benzodiazepines (Valium), tizanidine (Za￾naflex), and dantrolene (Dantrium) may also be used to 
treat spas- ticity.
Amantadine (Symmetrel), pemoline (Cylert), or fluoxetine 
(Prozac) to treat fatigue.
Beta-adrenergic blockers (Inderal), antiseizure agents 
(Neu- rontin), and benzodiazepines (Klonopin) to treat 
ataxia.
Management of Related Bowel and Bladder Problems 
Anticholinergics, alpha-adrenergic blockers, or antispas￾modic agents may be used to treat problems related to 
187 | P a g e
elimination, and patients may be taught to perform inter￾mittent self-catheterization as well. Additional measures 
include assessment of urinary tract infections; ascorbic 
acid to acidify urine; antibiotics when appropriate.
Nursing Interventions
Promoting Physical Mobility
Encourage relaxation and coordination exercises to pro￾mote muscle efficiency.
Encourage progressive resistance exercises to strengthen 
weak muscles.
Encourage walking exercises to improve gait.
188 | P a g e
Apply warm packs to spastic muscles; avoid hot baths 
due to sensory loss. 
Encourage daily exercises for muscle stretching to mini￾mize joint contractures..
Avoid hurrying patient in any activity, because hurrying 
increases spasticity.
189 | P a g e
B. PARKINSON’S DISEASE
 Parkinson’s disease is a slowly progressive degenerative
neurologic disorder affecting the brain centers that are re￾sponsible for control and regulation of movement. 
 The cause of the disease is mostly unknown but research 
suggests several causative factors (eg, genetics, atheroscle￾rosis, viral infections, head trauma). 
190 | P a g e
191 | P a g e
Pathophysiology
 Parkinson’s disease is associated with decreased levels of 
dopamine resulting from destruction of pigmented neu￾ronal cells in the substantia nigra in the basal ganglia re￾gion of the brain. 
 The loss of dopamine stores in this area of the brain results 
in more excitatory neurotransmitters than inhibitory neu￾rotransmitters, leading to an imbalance that affects volun￾tary movement. 
192 | P a g e
193 | P a g e
Clinical Manifestations
The cardinal signs of Parkinson’s disease are tremor, ri￾gidity, bradykinesia (abnormally slow movements), and 
postural instability.
Resting tremors: a slow, unilateral turning of the forearm 
and hand and a pill-rolling motion of the thumb against 
the fingers; tremor at rest and increasing with concentra￾tion and anxiety.
Resistance to passive limb movement characterizes mus￾cle rigidity; passive movement may cause the limb to 
move in jerky increments (lead-pipe or cog-wheel move￾ments); stiffness of the arms, legs, face, and posture are 
194 | P a g e
common; involuntary stiffness of passive extremity in￾creases when another extremity is engaged in voluntary 
active movement.
Impaired movement: Bradykinesia includes difficulty in 
ini- tiating, maintaining, and performing motor activities.
Loss of postural reflexes, shuffling gait, loss of balance 
(dif- ficulty pivoting); postural and gait problems place the 
patient at increased risk for falls.
Other Characteristics
Autonomic symptoms that include excessive and uncon-
195 | P a g e
trolled sweating, paroxysmal flushing, orthostatic hy￾poten- sion, gastric and urinary retention, constipation, 
and sexual dysfunction.
Psychiatric changes may include depression, dementia, 
delir- ium, and hallucinations; psychiatric manifestations 
may include personality changes, psychosis, and acute 
confusion.
Auditory and visual hallucinations may occur.
Hypokinesia (abnormally diminished movement) is com￾mon.
Assessment and Diagnostic Methods
196 | P a g e
Patient’s history and presence of two of the four cardinal 
manifestations: tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, and pos￾tural changes.
Positron emission tomography (PET) and single photon 
emission computed tomography (SPECT) scanning have 
been helpful in understanding the disease and advancing 
treatmen.
Medical history, presenting symptoms, neurologic exam￾ina- tion, and response to pharmacologic management 
are care- fully evaluated when making the diagnosis.
Medical Management
197 | P a g e
Goal of treatment is to control symptoms and maintain 
func- tional independence; no approach prevents disease 
progression.
Pharmacologic Therapy
Antipakinsonism act by dopamine activities.
Levodopa (Larodopa) is the most effective agent and the 
mainstay of treatment.
Anticholinergic agents to control tremor and rigidity.
Amantadine hydrochloride (Symmetrel), an antiviral 
agent, to reduce rigidity, tremor, and bradykinesia.
Dopamine agonists (eg, pergolide [Permax], bromocriptine 
198 | P a g e
mesylate [Parlodel]), ropinirole, and pramipexole are used 
to postpone the initiation of carbidopa and levodopa ther￾apy.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) to inhibit dopa￾mine breakdown.
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitors to re￾duce motor fluctuation.
Antidepressant drugs.
Antihistamine drugs to allay tremors.
Surgical Management
Surgery to destroy a part of the thalamus (stereotactic 
199 | P a g e
thal- amotomy and pallidotomy) to interrupt nerve path￾ways and alleviate tremor or rigidity.
Transplantation of neural cells from fetal tissue of human 
or animal source to reestablish normal dopamine release.
Deep brain stimulation with pacemakerlike brain im￾plants to block nerve pathways in the brain that cause 
tremors.
Nursing Assessment
The nurse notes how the disease affects the patient’s ac￾tivities of daily living and functional abilities and also ob￾serves for degree of disability and functional 
200 | P a g e
Change that occur throughout the day, such as re￾sponses to medica- tion. 
Nursing Interventions
Improving Mobility
Help patient plan progressive program of daily exercise to 
increase muscle strength, improve coordination and dex￾terity, reduce muscular rigidity, and prevent contrac￾tures.
Encourage postural exercises to counter the tendency of 
the head and neck to be drawn forward and down. Teach 
patient to walk erect. Also encourage breathing exercises 
201 | P a g e
while walking and frequent rest periods to prevent fatigue 
or frustration.
Advise patient that warm baths and massage help relax 
muscles.
Enhancing Self-Care Activities
Enlist assistance of an occupational therapist as indi￾cated.
Improving Bowel Elimination
Increase fluid intake; eat foods with moderate fiber con￾tent.
Improving Swallowing and Nutrition
202 | P a g e
Promote swallowing and prevent aspiration by having pa￾tient sit in upright position during meals.
Provide semisolid diet with thick liquids that are easier to 
swallow.
Monitor patient’s weight on a weekly basis.
Encouraging Use of Assistive Devices
An occupational therapist can assist in identifying appro￾priate adaptive devices.
203 | P a g e
C. AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS
 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a fatal type of motor neuron 
disease. It is characterized by progressive degeneration of 
nerve cells in the spinal cord and brain.
 It is a disease of unknown cause in which there is a loss of 
motor neurons (nerve cells controlling muscles) in the an￾terior horns of the spinal cord and the motor nuclei of the 
lower brain stem. 
 Death usually occurs from infection, respiratory failure, or 
aspiration. The average time from onset to death is about 3 
to 5 years.
204 | P a g e
205 | P a g e
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS NORMAL BRAIN - MRI
206 | P a g e
Causes 
 Autoimmune disease, 
 free radical damage, 
 oxidative stress, and 
 transmission of an autosomal dominant trait for familial 
ALS 
Clinical Manifestations
In most patients, the chief symptoms are fatigue, progressive 
muscle weakness, cramps, fasciculations (twitching), and 
incoordination.
207 | P a g e
Loss of Motor Neurons in Anterior Horns of Spinal Cord
 Progressive weakness and atrophy of the arms, trunk, or 
leg muscles.
 Spasticity; deep tendon stretch reflexes are brisk and 
overactive.
 Anal and bladder sphincters usually remain intact.
Weakness in Muscles Supplied by Cranial Nerves (25 % 
of Patients in Early Stage )
 Difficulty talking, swallowing, and ultimately breathing
208 | P a g e
 Soft palate and upper esophageal weakness, causing liq￾uids to be regurgitated through nose
 Impaired ability to laugh, cough, or blow the nose
Bulbar Muscle Impairment
 Progressive difficulty in speaking and swallowing, and as￾piration
 Nasal voice and unintelligible speech
 Emotional lability
 Eventually, compromised respiratory function
Assessment and Diagnostic Methods
209 | P a g e
 Diagnosis is based on signs and symptoms 
 Electromyographic (EMG) and muscle biopsy studies, 
 MRI, and neuropsychological testing may be helpful.
Medical Management
 No specific treatment for ALS is available. Symptomatic 
treatment includes the following:
 Riluzole (Rilutek), a glutamate antagonist.
 Baclofen, dantrolene sodium, or diazepam for spasticity.
 Mechanical ventilation (using negative-pressure ventila￾tors) for alveolar hypoventilation; noninvasive positive￾pressure ventilation is also an option.
210 | P a g e
 Anaphylaxis
 Enteral feedings (percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy [ 
PEG]) for patients with aspiration or swallowing difficulties.
 Decision about life support measures is based on patient’s 
and family’s understanding of the disease, prognosis, and 
implications of initiating such therapy.
 Encourage patient to complete an advance directive or “liv￾ing will” to preserve autonomy.
Nursing Management
 The nursing care of the patient with ALS is generally the 
same as the basic care plan for patients with degenerative 
211 | P a g e
neurologic disorders (Myasthenia Gravis).
Educate patient about self-care, including medication 
man- agement, energy conservation, strategies to help 
with ocular manifestations, and prevention and manage￾ment of complications.
Encourage patient to determine the best times for daily 
dosing by keeping a diary to determine fluctuation of 
symptoms and to learn when the medication is wearing 
off.
Teach the patient strategies to conserve energy (e.g., if the 
patient lives in a two-story home, suggest that frequently 
used items such as hygiene products, cleaning products, 
212 | P a g e
and snacks be kept on each floor to minimize travel be￾tween floors).
Help the patient identify the optimal times for rest 
throughout the day.
Instruct patient to schedule mealtimes to coincide with 
the peak effects of anticholinesterase medication; encour￾age rest before meals to reduce muscle fatigue; advise the 
patient to sit upright during meals, with the neck slightly 
flexed to facilitate swallowing.
Encourage meals of soft foods in gravy or sauces; if chok￾ing occurs frequently, suggest pureed food with a pud-
213 | P a g e
dinglike consistency. Supplemental feedings may be nec￾essary in some patients to ensure adequate nutrition.
Ensure suction is available at home and that the patient 
and family are instructed in its use.
Instruct the patient to tape the eyes closed for short in￾tervals and to regularly instill artificial tears; patients who 
wear eyeglasses can have “crutches” attached to help lift 
the eye- lids; patching of one eye can help with double 
vision.
Remind the patient of the importance of maintaining 
health promotion practices and of following health care 
screening recommendations.
214 | P a g e
Encourage patient to note and avoid factors that exacer￾bate symptoms and potentially cause crisis: emotional 
stress, infections (particularly respiratory infections), vig￾orous physical activity, some medications, and high envi￾ronmental temperature.
215 | P a g e
D. DEMENTIA
 Not a specific disease, dementia is a group of conditions 
characterised by impairment of at least two brain func￾tions, such as memory loss and judgement.
 Dementia is caused by damage to brain cells. This dam￾age interferes with the ability of brain cells to communicate 
with each other. When brain cells cannot communicate 
normally, thinking, behavior and feelings can be affected.
 Symptoms include forgetfulness, limited social skills and 
thinking abilities so impaired that it interferes with daily 
functioning.
216 | P a g e
217 | P a g e
 There is disturbance of multiple higher cortical functions, 
including memory, thinking, orientation, comprehension, 
calculation, learning capacity, language, and judgement. 
 Consciousness is not clouded.
 In advanced dementia, the person will lose the ability to 
eat, drink, bathe, dress, or use the toilet without assis￾tance. 
 Alzheimer’s disease is the most common form of dementia 
and possibly contributes to 60–70% of cases. 
Causes
Following are major etiologic categories for the syndrome of 
218 | P a g e
dementia:
 Dementia of the Alzheimer’s type. The exact disease of 
Alzheimer’s disease is unknown, but several theories have 
been proposed, such as reduction in brain acetylcholine, 
the formation of plaques and tangles, serious head trauma, 
and genetic factors
 Vascular Dementia. caused by significant cerebrovascular 
disease. The client suffers small strokes caused by arte￾rial hypertension or cerebral emboli or thrombi, which de￾stroy many areas of the brain. 
 Dementia due to HIV disease. The immune dysfunction 
associated with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) can 
219 | P a g e
lead to brain infections by other organisms. HIV also ap￾pears to cause dementia directly.
 Dementia due to head trauma. The syndrome of symp￾toms associated with dementia can be brought on by a 
traumatic head injury.
 Dementia due to Parkinson’s disease. Parkinsons’s dis￾ease is caused by a loss of nerve cells in the substantia 
nigra of the basal ganglia. 
 Dementia due to other general medical condi￾tions. Some of these include endocrine conditions, pulmo￾nary disease, hepatic or renal failure, cardiopulmonary in￾sufficiency, fluid and electrolyte imbalances, nutritional 
220 | P a g e
deficiencies, frontal or temporal lobe lesions, uncon￾trolled epilepsy, central nervous system or systemic infec￾tions, and other neurological conditions.
 Substance-induced Persisting Dementia. related to the 
persisting effects of substances such as alcohol, inhalants, 
sedatives, other medications, and environmental toxins.
Clinical Manifestations
 Memory impairment. Impaired ability to learn new infor￾mation or to recall previously learned information.
 Impairment in abstract thinking, judgment, and impulse 
control.
221 | P a g e
 Impairment in language ability, such as difficulty naming 
objects. In some instances, the individual may not speak at 
all (aphasia).
 Personality changes are common.
 Impaired ability to perform motor activities despite in￾tact motor abilities (apraxia).
 Disorientation. Patient may feel disoriented regarding cur￾rent place, time, o names of persons they are close with.
 Wandering. Because of disorientation, patient with demen￾tia may often wander from one place to another.
 Delusions are common (particularly delusions of persecu￾tion).
222 | P a g e
Assessment and Diagnostic Findings
Laboratory tests can be performed to rule out other condi￾tions that may cause cognitive impairment.
Complete blood cell count (CBC). Workup to rule out 
hematologic disease.
Liver enzyme levels. Abnormalities found in screening 
of liver enzyme levels require further workup to rule out 
hepatic disease.
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels. workup to 
rule thyroid disease.
Rapid plasma reagent. Abnormalities in rapid plasma 
reagent (RPR) require further workup to rule out syphilis.
223 | P a g e
HIV serology. Abnormalities in HIV serology and/or PCR
require further workup to rule out HIV/AIDS.
Paraneoplastic antibodies. Workup to rule out autoim￾mune encephalitis.
Medical Management
 Pharmacological Management - use of centrally acting 
cholinesterase inhibitors to attempt to compensate for the 
depletion of acetylcholine in the cerebral cortex and hippo￾campus.
Cholinesterase inhibitors. Cholinesterase inhibitors 
are used to palliate cholinergic deficiency.
224 | P a g e
N-Methyl-D-Aspartate antagonists. this agent may 
be used alone or in combination with AChE inhibitors.
 Nutritional supplement. Medical foods are dietary supple￾ments intended to compensate specific nutritional prob￾lems caused by a disease or condition; Dietary 
measures. caprylidene (Axona) is a prescription medical 
food that is metabolized into ketone bodies, and the brain 
can use these ketone bodies for energy when its ability to 
process glucose is impaired. 
 Physical activity. Routine physical activity and exercise 
may have an impact on dementia progression and may per￾haps have a protective effect on brain health; the patient’s 
225 | P a g e
surroundings should be safe and familiar; maintaining 
structured routines may be helpful to decrease patient’s 
stress in regard to meals, medication, and other therapeu￾tic activities aimed at maintaining cognitive functioning.
Nursing Management
Nursing Assessment
 Psychiatric interview. The psychiatric interview must 
contain a description of the client’s mental status with a 
thorough description of behavior, flow of thought and 
226 | P a g e
speech, affect, thought processes and mental content, sen￾sorium and intellectual resources, cognitive status, insight, 
and judgment.
Nursing Interventions
 Orient client. Frequently orient client to reality and sur￾roundings. Allow client to have familiar objects around him 
or her; use other items, such as a clock, a calendar, and 
daily schedules, to assist in maintaining reality orientation.
 Encourage caregivers about patient reorienta￾tion. Teach prospective caregivers how to orient client to 
227 | P a g e
time, person, place, and circumstances, as required. These 
caregivers will be responsible for client safety after dis￾charge from the hospital.
 Enforce with positive feedback. Give positive feedback 
when thinking and behavior are appropriate, or when client 
verbalizes that certain ideas expressed are not based in re￾ality. Positive feedback increases self-esteem and enhances 
desire to repeat appropriate behavior.
 Explain simply. Use simple explanations and face-to-face 
interaction when communicating with client. Do not shout 
message into client’s ear. Speaking slowly and in a face-to￾face position is most effective when communicating with 
228 | P a g e
an elderly individual experiencing a hearing loss.
 Discourage suspiciousness of others. Express reasonable 
doubt if client relays suspicious beliefs in response to de￾lusional thinking. Discuss with the client the potential per￾sonal negative effects of continued suspiciousness of oth￾ers.
 Avoid cultivation of false ideas. Do not permit rumina￾tion of false ideas. When this begins, talk to client about 
real people and real events.
 Observe client closely. Close observation of client’s be￾havior is indicated if delusional thinking reveals an inten￾tion for violence. Client safety is a nursing priority.
229 | P a g e
E. ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
 Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive, irreversible, de￾generative neurologic disease that begins insidiously and is 
characterized by gradual losses of cognitive function and 
disturbances in behavior and affect. It is important to note 
that AD is not a normal part of aging.
 Although the greatest risk factor for AD is increasing age, 
many environmental, dietary, and inflammatory factors 
also may determine whether a person suffers from this cog￾nitive disease. 
230 | P a g e
231 | P a g e
Causes
 AD is a complex brain disorder caused by a combination of 
various factors that may include genetics, neurotransmit￾ter changes, vascular abnormalities, stress hormones, cir￾cadian changes, head trauma, and the presence of seizure 
disorders.
Classification
 Familial or early-onset AD (which is rare, and accounts for 
less than 10% of cases) 
 Sporadic or late-onset AD.
232 | P a g e
Clinical Manifestations
 In early disease there is forgetfulness and subtle memory 
loss, although social skills and behavioral patterns remain 
intact. Conversation becomes difficult, and word-finding 
difficulties occur.
 Ability to formulate concepts and think abstractly disap￾pears.
 Patient may exhibit inappropriate impulsive behavior.
 Personality changes are evident; patient may become de￾pressed, suspicious, paranoid, hostile, and combative.
 Speaking skills deteriorate to nonsense syllables; agitation 
and physical activity increase.
233 | P a g e
 Voracious appetite may develop from high activity level; 
dysphagia is noted with disease progression.
 Eventually patient requires help with all aspects of daily 
living, including toileting because incontinence occurs.
 Terminal stage may last for months or years.
Assessment and Diagnostic Findings
 Clinical symptoms are found through health history, in￾cluding physical findings and results from functional abil￾ities assessments (eg, Mini-Mental Status Examination)
 Electroencephalography (EEG)
 Computed tomography (CT) scan
234 | P a g e
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
 Laboratory tests (complete blood cell count, chemistry pro￾file, and vitamin B12 and thyroid hormone levels) and exam￾ination of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
Medical Management
There is no cure, treatment relies on managing cognitive 
symptoms with cholinesterase inhibitors, such as:-
Donepezil hydrochloride (Aricept), 
Rivastigmine tartrate (Exelon), 
Galantamine hydrobromide (Razadyne 
Tacrine (Cognex). 
235 | P a g e
These drugs enhance acetylcholine uptake in the brain to 
maintain memory skills for a period of time. 
Nursing management
Assessment
Obtain health history with mental status examination and 
physical examination, noting symptoms indicating demen￾tia. 
Nursing Interventions
Supporting Cognitive Function
236 | P a g e
 Provide a calm, predictable environment to minimize con￾fusion and disorientation.
 Help patient feel a sense of security with a quiet, pleasant 
manner; clear, simple explanations; and use of memory 
aids and cues.
Promoting Physical Safety
 Provide a safe environment (whether at home or in the hos￾pital) to allow patient to move about as freely as possible 
and relieve family’s worry about safety.
 Prevent falls and other accidents by removing obvious haz￾ards and providing adequate lighting; install handrails in 
the home.
237 | P a g e
 Prohibit driving.
 Reduce wandering behavior with gentle persuasion and 
distraction. Supervise all activities outside the home to pro￾tect patient. As needed, secure doors leading from the 
house. Ensure that patient wears an identification bracelet 
or neck chain.
 Avoid restraints because they may increase agitation.
Promoting Independence in Self-Care Activities
 Simplify daily activities into short achievable steps so that 
patient feels a sense of accomplishment.
 Maintain patient’s personal dignity and autonomy.
 Encourage patient to make choices when appropriate and 
238 | P a g e
to participate in self-care activities as much as possible.
Reducing Anxiety and Agitation
 Provide emotional support to reinforce a positive self-im￾age.
 When skill losses occur, adjust goals to fit patient’s declin￾ing ability and structure activities to help prevent agitation.
 Keep the environment simple, familiar, and noise-free; limit 
changes.
 Remain calm and unhurried, particularly if the patient is 
experiencing a combative, agitated state known as cata￾strophic reaction (overreaction to excessive stimulation).
Improving Communication
239 | P a g e
 Reduce noises and distractions.
 Use easy-to-understand sentences to convey messages.
Providing for Socialization and Intimacy Needs
 Encourage visits, letters, and phone calls (visits should be 
brief and nonstressful, with one or two visitors at a time).
 Encourage patient to participate in simple activities or hob￾bies.
 Advise that the nonjudgmental friendliness of a pet can 
provide satisfying activity and an outlet for energy.
 Encourage spouse to talk about any sexual concerns and 
suggest sexual counseling if necessary.
Promoting Adequate Nutrition
240 | P a g e
 Keep mealtimes simple and calm; avoid confrontations.
 Cut food into small pieces to prevent choking, and convert 
liquids to gelatin to ease swallowing. Offer one dish at a 
time.
 Prevent burns by serving typically hot food and beverages 
warm.
Balancing Activity and Rest
 Offer music, warm milk, or a back rub to help patient relax 
and fall asleep.
 To enhance nighttime sleep, provide sufficient opportuni￾ties for daytime exercise. Discourage long periods of day￾time sleeping.
241 | P a g e
 Assess and address any unmet underlying physical or psy￾chological needs that may prompt wandering or other in￾appropriate behavior.
242 | P a g e
PERIPHERAL NERVE DISORDERS 
GUILLAIN’S-BARRE SYNDROME
 Guillain–Barré syndrome is a rapid-onset muscle weak￾ness caused by the immune system damaging the periph￾eral nervous system.
 It results in the acute, rapid segmental demyelination of 
peripheral nerves and some cranial nerves, producing as￾cending weakness with dyskinesia (inability to execute vol-
243 | P a g e
untary movements), hyporeflexia, and paresthesias (numb￾ness). 
244 | P a g e
Pathophysiology
 GBS results from an autoimmune (cell-mediated and hu￾moral) attack on peripheral nerve myelin proteins (sub￾stances speeding conduction of nerve impulses). 
 The Schwann cell (which produces myelin in the peripheral
nervous system) is spared in GBS, allowing for remye￾lination in the recovery phase of the disease.
Clinical Manifestations
 Areflexia and ascending weakness, although there may be 
variations in presentation. 
245 | P a g e
 Muscle weakness and diminished reflexes of the lower ex￾tremities; hyporeflexia and weakness may progress to tet￾raplegia; Demyelination of the nerves that supply the dia￾phragm and intercostal muscles results in neuromuscular 
respiratory failure.
 Sensory symptoms include paresthesias (burning or prick￾ling sensation) of the hands and feet and pain due to the 
demyelination of sensory fibers.
 Optic nerve demyelination may result in blindness.
 Bulbar muscle weakness related to demyelination of the 
glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves results in the inability 
to swallow or clear secretions.
246 | P a g e
 Vagus nerve demyelination results in autonomic dysfunc￾tion, manifested by instability of the cardiovascular system 
(tachycardia, bradycardia, hypertension, or orthostatic hy￾potension).
Assessment and Diagnostic Findings
Clinical presentation (symmetric weakness, diminished re￾flexes, and upward progression of motor weakness) and 
history of recent viral infection.
Changes in vital capacity and negative inspiratory force 
are assessed to identify impending neuromuscular respir￾atory failure.
247 | P a g e
Elevated protein levels are detected in cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) evaluation, without an increase in other cells.
Evoked potential studies demonstrate a progressive loss of 
nerve conduction velocity.
Medical Management
 GBS is considered a medical emergency; patient is man￾aged in an intensive care unit.
 Respiratory problems may require respiratory therapy or 
mechanical ventilation.
 Elective intubation may be implemented before the onset of 
extreme respiratory muscle fatigue.
248 | P a g e
 Anticoagulant agents and antiembolism stockings or se￾quential compression boots may be used to prevent throm￾bosis and pulmonary emboli.
 Plasmapheresis (plasma exchange) or intravenous immu￾noglobulin (IVIG) may be used to directly affect the periph￾eral nerve myelin antibody level.
 Continuous ECG monitoring: Observe and treat cardiac 
dysrhythmias and other labile complications of autonomic 
dysfunction. 
 Tachycardia and hypertension are treated with short-act￾ing medications such as alpha-adrenergic blocking agents. 
249 | P a g e
 Hypotension is managed by increasing the amount of in￾travenous fluid administered.
Nursing Management
Assessment 
Monitor the patient for life-threatening complications (respir￾atory failure, cardiac dysrhythmias, deep vein thrombosis 
[DVT]) so that appropriate interventions can be initiated. 
Nursing Interventions
250 | P a g e
Maintaining Respiratory Function
 Encourage use of incentive spirometry and provide chest 
physiotherapy.
 Monitor for changes in vital capacity and negative inspira￾tory force; if vital capacity falls, mechanical ventilation will 
be necessary.
 Suction to maintain a clear airway.
 Assess blood pressure and heart rate frequently to identify 
autonomic dysfunction.
Enhancing Physical Mobility
 Provide passive range-of-motion exercises at least twice 
251 | P a g e
daily; support the paralyzed extremities in functional posi￾tions. 
 Change patient’s position at least every 2 hours.
 Administer prescribed anticoagulant regimen to prevent 
DVT and pulmonary embolism; assist with physical ther￾apy and position changes; use antiembolism stockings or 
sequential compression boots, and provide adequate hy￾dration.
 Place padding over bony prominences such as elbows and 
heels to reduce the risk of pressure ulcers.
Providing Adequate Nutrition
 Collaborate with physician and dietitian to meet patient’s 
252 | P a g e
nutritional and hydration needs. Provide adequate nutri￾tion to prevent muscle wasting.
 Evaluate laboratory test results that may indicate malnu￾trition or dehydration (both of these conditions increase the 
risk for pressure ulcers).
 If patient has paralytic ileus, provide intravenous fluids 
and parenteral nutrition as prescribed, and monitor for re￾turn of bowel sounds.
 Provide gastrostomy tube feedings if patient cannot swal￾low.
 Assess the return of the gag reflex and bowel sounds before 
resuming oral nutrition.
253 | P a g e
Improving Communication
 Establish communication through lip reading, use of pic￾ture cards, or eye blinking.
 Collaborate with speech therapist, as indicated.
Decreasing Fear and Anxiety
 Refer patient and family to a support group.
 Allow and encourage family members to participate in 
physical care of patient after providing instruction and sup￾port.
 Provide patient with information about condition, empha￾sizing a positive appraisal of coping resources.
 Encourage relaxation exercises and distraction techniques.
254 | P a g e
 Create a positive attitude and atmosphere.
 Encourage diversional activities to decrease loneliness and 
isolation. 
Monitoring and Managing Potential Complications
 Assess respiratory function at regular and frequent inter￾vals; monitor respiratory rate, the quality of respirations, 
and vital capacity.
 Watch for breathlessness while talking, shallow and irreg￾ular breathing, use of accessory muscles, tachycardia, 
weak cough, and changes in respiratory pattern.
 Monitor for and report cardiac dysrhythmias (through ECG 
255 | P a g e
monitoring), transient hypertension, orthostatic hypoten￾sion, DVT, pulmonary embolism, and urinary retention.
256 | P a g e
DISORDERS OF THE NEUROMUSCULAR 
JUNCTION 
A. MYESTHENIA GRAVIS
 Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an autoimmune disorder affect￾ing the myoneural junction. Antibodies directed at the ac￾etylcholine receptor sites impair transmission of impulses 
across the myoneural junction. 
 Therefore, fewer receptors are avail- able for stimulation, 
resulting in voluntary muscle weakness that escalates with 
continued activity.
257 | P a g e
258 | P a g e
Clinical Manifestations
MG is purely a motor disorder with no effect on sensation 
or coordination.
Initial manifestation involves ocular muscles (eg, diplopia 
and ptosis)
Weakness of the muscles of the face (resulting in a bland 
facial expression) and throat (bulbar symptoms) and 
gener- alized weakness
Laryngeal involvement: dysphonia (voice impairment) and 
increases the risk of choking and aspiration
Generalized weakness that affects all extremities and the 
intercostal muscles, resulting in decreasing vital capacity 
259 | P a g e
and respiratory failure
Assessment and Diagnostic Findings
Injection of edrophonium (Tensilon) is used to confirm the 
diagnosis (have atropine available for side effects). Im￾provement in muscle strength represents a positive test 
and usually confirms the diagnosis.
MRI may demonstrate an enlarged thymus gland.
Tests include serum analysis for acetylcholine receptor 
and electromyography (EMG) to measure electrical poten￾tial of muscle cells.
260 | P a g e
Complications
A myasthenic crisis is an exacerbation of the disease pro￾cess characterized by severe generalized muscle weak￾ness and respiratory and bulbar weakness that may re￾sult in respiratory failure.
A cholinergic crisis caused by overmedication with cho￾linesterase inhibitors is rare; atropine sulfate should be 
on hand to treat bradycardia or respiratory distress.
Neuromuscular respiratory failure is the critical compli￾cation in myasthenic and cholinergic crises.
Medical Management
261 | P a g e
Management of MG is directed at improving function and 
reducing and removing circulating antibodies. 
administration of anticholinesterase medication and im￾munosuppressive therapy, plasmapheresis, and thymec￾tomy. 
Pharmacologic Therapy
Pyridostigmine bromide (Mestinon) is the first line of ther￾apy. It provides symptomatic relief by inhibiting the 
breakdown of acetylcholine and increasing the relative 
concentration of available acetylcholine at the neuromus￾cular junction.
262 | P a g e
Immunosuppressive therapy aims to reduce the produc￾tion of antireceptor antibody or remove it directly by 
plasma exchange. Corticosteroids are given to sup- press 
the immune response, decreasing the amount of blocking 
antibody.
Other Therapy
Plasma exchange (plasmapheresis) produces a temporary 
reduction in the titer of circulating antibodies.
Thymectomy (surgical removal of the thymus) produces 
substantial remis- sion, especially in patients with tumor 
or hyperplasia of the thymus gland.
263 | P a g e
Nursing Management
Educate patient about self-care, including medication 
man- agement, energy conservation, strategies to help 
with ocular manifestations, and prevention and manage￾ment of complications.
Encourage patient to determine the best times for daily 
dosing by keeping a diary to determine fluctuation of 
symptoms and to learn when the medication is wearing 
off.
Teach the patient strategies to conserve energy (e.g., if the 
patient lives in a two-story home, suggest that frequently 
used items such as hygiene products, cleaning products, 
264 | P a g e
and snacks be kept on each floor to minimize travel be￾tween floors).
Help the patient identify the optimal times for rest 
throughout the day.
Instruct patient to schedule mealtimes to coincide with 
the peak effects of anticholinesterase medication; encour￾age rest before meals to reduce muscle fatigue; advise the 
patient to sit upright during meals, with the neck slightly 
flexed to facilitate swallowing.
Encourage meals of soft foods in gravy or sauces; if chok￾ing occurs frequently, suggest pureed food with a pud-
265 | P a g e
dinglike consistency. Supplemental feedings may be nec￾essary in some patients to ensure adequate nutrition.
Ensure suction is available at home and that the patient 
and family are instructed in its use.
Instruct the patient to tape the eyes closed for short in￾tervals and to regularly instill artificial tears; patients who 
wear eyeglasses can have “crutches” attached to help lift 
the eye- lids; patching of one eye can help with double 
vision.
Remind the patient of the importance of maintaining 
health promotion practices and of following health care 
screening recommendations.
266 | P a g e
Encourage patient to note and avoid factors that exacer￾bate symptoms and potentially cause crisis: emotional 
stress, infections (particularly respiratory infections), vig￾orous physical activity, some medications, and high envi￾ronmental temperature.
267 | P a g e
B. BELL’S PALSY
Definition
 Bell’s palsy (facial paralysis) is due to peripheral involve￾ment of the seventh cranial nerve on one side, which re￾sults in weakness or paralysis of the facial muscles.
 The cause is unknown, but possible causes may include 
vascular ischemia, viral disease (herpes simplex, herpes 
zoster), autoimmune disease, or a combination. 
 Bell’s palsy may represent a type of pressure paralysis in 
which ischemic necrosis of the facial nerve causes a distor￾tion of the face, increased lacrimation (tearing), and painful 
268 | P a g e
sensations in the face, behind the ear, and in the eye. 
269 | P a g e
Medical Management
The objectives of management are to maintain facial mus￾cle tone and to prevent or minimize denervation.
Corticosteroid therapy (prednisone) may be initiated to 
reduce inflammation and edema, which reduces vascular 
compression and permits restoration of blood circulation 
to the nerve.
Early administration of corticosteroids appears to dimin￾ish severity, relieve pain, and minimize denervation.
Facial pain is controlled with analgesic agents or heat ap￾plied to the involved side of the face.
Additional modalities may include electrical stimulation 
270 | P a g e
applied to the face to prevent muscle atrophy, or surgical 
exploration of the facial nerve.
Surgery may be performed if a tumor is suspected, for 
surgical decompression of the facial nerve, and for surgi￾cal rehabilitation of a paralyzed face.
Nursing Management
Teaching Eye Care
Because the eye usually does not close completely, the 
blink reflex is diminished, so the eye is vulnerable to in￾jury from dust and foreign particles. Corneal irritation 
271 | P a g e
and ulceration may occur. Distortion of the lower lid al￾ters the proper drainage of tears. Key teaching points in￾clude the following:
Cover the eye with a protective shield at night.
Apply eye ointment to keep eyelids closed during sleep.
Close the paralyzed eyelid manually before going to sleep.
Wear wraparound sunglasses or goggles to decrease nor￾mal evaporation from the eye.
Teaching About Maintaining Muscle Tone
Show patient how to perform facial massage with gentle 
upward motion several times daily when the patient can 
tol- erate the massage.
272 | P a g e
Demonstrate facial exercises, such as wrinkling the fore￾head, blowing out the cheeks, and whistling, in an effort 
to pre- vent muscle atrophy.
Instruct patient to avoid exposing the face to cold and 
drafts.
273 | P a g e
C. CEREBRAL PALSY
 Cerebral palsy (CP) is a group of disorders that affect a per￾son’s ability to move and maintain balance and posture. CP 
is the most common motor disability in childhood. Cere￾bral means having to do with the brain. Palsy means weak￾ness or problems with using the muscles. 
 CP is caused by abnormal brain development or damage to 
the developing brain that affects a person’s ability to con￾trol his or her muscles.
 The symptoms of CP vary from person to person. A person 
with severe CP might need to use special equipment to be 
274 | P a g e
able to walk, or might not be able to walk at all and might 
need lifelong care. A person with mild CP, on the other 
hand, might walk a little awkwardly, but might not need 
any special help. CP does not get worse over time, though 
the exact symptoms can change over a person’s lifetime.
 All people with CP have problems with movement and pos￾ture. Many also have related conditions such as intellectual 
disability; seizures; problems with vision, hearing, or 
speech; changes in the spine (such as scoliosis); or joint 
problems (such as contractures).
275 | P a g e
276 | P a g e
 
277 | P a g e
Types of Cerebral Palsy
Classification is based the main type of movement disorder 
involved. There are four main types of CP:
Spastic Cerebral Palsy
 People with spastic CP have increased muscle tone. This 
means their muscles are stiff and, as a result, their move￾ments can be awkward.
 Spastic CP usually is described by what parts of the body 
are affected:
Spastic diplegia/diparesis―In this type of CP, muscle 
stiffness is mainly in the legs, with the arms less affected 
278 | P a g e
or not affected at all. People with spastic diplegia might 
have difficulty walking because tight hip and leg muscles 
cause their legs to pull together, turn inward, and cross 
at the knees.
Spastic hemiplegia/hemiparesis―This type of CP affects 
only one side of a person’s body; usually the arm is more 
affected than the leg.
Spastic quadriplegia/quadriparesis―Spastic quadriplegia 
is the most severe form of spastic CP and affects all four 
limbs, the trunk, and the face. People with spastic quad￾riparesis usually cannot walk and often have other devel-
279 | P a g e
opmental disabilities such as intellectual disability; sei￾zures; or problems with vision, hearing, or speech.
Dyskinetic Cerebral Palsy 
 People with dyskinetic CP have problems controlling the 
movement of their hands, arms, feet, and legs, making it 
difficult to sit and walk. 
 The movements are uncontrollable and can be slow and 
writhing or rapid and jerky. Sometimes the face and tongue 
are affected and the person has a hard time sucking, swal￾lowing, and talking. 
280 | P a g e
Ataxic Cerebral Palsy
 People with ataxic CP have problems with balance and co￾ordination. 
 They might be unsteady when they walk. They might have 
a hard time with quick movements or movements that need 
a lot of control, like writing. 
 They might have a hard time controlling their hands or 
arms when they reach for something.
Mixed Cerebral Palsy
 Some people have symptoms of more than one type of CP. 
The most common type of mixed CP is spastic-dyskinetic 
281 | P a g e
CP.
Early Signs
 The main sign that a child might have CP is a delay reach￾ing motor or movement milestones (such as rolling over, 
sitting, standing, or walking). Following are some other 
signs of possible CP. 
In a Baby Younger Than 6 Months of Age
His head lags when you pick him up while he’s lying on his 
back
He feels stiff
He feels floppy
282 | P a g e
When held cradled in your arms, he seems to overextend 
his back and neck, constantly acting as if he is pushing 
away from you
When you pick him up, his legs get stiff and they cross or 
scissor
In a Baby Older Than 6 Months of Age
She doesn’t roll over in either direction
She cannot bring her hands together
She has difficulty bringing her hands to her mouth
She reaches out with only one hand while keeping the other 
fisted
283 | P a g e
Screening and Diagnosis
Developmental Monitoring
Developmental monitoring (also called surveillance) means 
tracking a child’s growth and development over time. 
If any concerns about the child’s development are raised 
during monitoring, then a developmental screening test 
should be given as soon as possible.
Developmental Screening
During developmental screening a short test is given to see 
284 | P a g e
if the child has specific developmental delays, such as mo￾tor or movement delays. 
Treatments and Intervention Services
Physiotherapy for CP Children
 Improved mobility can sometimes be achieved by the com￾bined use of techniques like hydrotherapy, and Snoezelen 
techniques.
 Stretching in patients with CP, particularly of bi-articular 
muscles, as well as immobilisation in a stretched position.
Orthopaedic surgery
285 | P a g e
 Surgery is mainly undertaken on the lower limb, but occa￾sionally in the upper limb. Some children require surgery 
for scoliosis. 
 Physiotherapy is an essential part of post-operative man￾agement. Gait laboratories are useful in planning the sur￾gical program for children who can walk independently or 
with sticks or walking frames.
 The hip: soft tissue surgery is often effective for children 
when the hip problems are detected at an early stage (hence 
the importance of regular X-rays). Lengthening of the ad￾ductor muscles may be all that is required in younger chil￾dren. 
286 | P a g e
 For most children surgery to keep the hips in joint, or to 
put the hips back in joint, is preferable to leaving the child 
with a dislocated hip which is frequently painful in later 
life.
 The knee: lengthening of the hamstrings can help the knee 
straighten and so improve the walking pattern. Sometimes 
transferring a muscle from the front to the back of the knee 
can also help by reducing stiffness around the knee.
Treatment for the associated medical Problems
 Epilepsy - The most commonly used anticonvulsants are: 
Carbamazepine, Sodium valproate, Lamotrigine, Phenytoin 
287 | P a g e
etc. 
 Saliva control - The speech pathologist plays a central role 
and can provide strategies to improve dribbling problems. 
When these strategies are not effective, medication is occa￾sionally used, particularly in children over the age of six 
years. Benzhexol hydrochloride (‘Artane’) reduces salivary 
secretions. Occasionally irritability may occur. 
 Constipation - Children with cerebral palsy often have 
problems with constipation. A high fibre diet and increased 
fluid intake can help with this problem. 
 Nutrition - A dietitian can provide useful advice about ade-
288 | P a g e
quate nutrition. Excessive weight gain can be very disad￾vantageous for children learning to walk. 
Nursing Interventions and Rationales
 Perform complete nursing assessment to determine type of 
deficits present (auditory, visual, motor or intellectual)
 Perform range of motion exercises routinely per facility pro￾tocol. ROM exercises help to promote movement and 
strengthen muscle tone, and to prevent contractures.
 Provide education and assistance with orthotic devices as 
required
289 | P a g e
 Patient may require use of braces or other orthotic sup￾ports for optimal mobility. Assist patient and parents to un￾derstand the need for and proper use of such devices.
 Monitor during meals and snacks for signs of swallowing 
difficulty. Patients often have difficulty swallowing due to 
uncontrollable movements which can lead to choking or as￾piration.
 Observe for signs of pain or discomfort and pay attention 
to nonverbal cues. Provide alternative communication 
(hand signals, pictures, etc.)
 Many CP patients have difficulty with speech and express￾ing their needs. Spending time to become familiar with the 
290 | P a g e
patient helps to anticipate and recognize needs.
 Provide skin care as appropriate. Provide barrier creams 
and change undergarments as necessary. Note areas of 
friction or irritation.
 Patients who are incontinent or have limited mobility are at 
risk for skin breakdown and infections.
 Administer medications appropriately
Anticholinergics
Muscle relaxers
Anticonvulsants
 Anticholinergics (benztropine) are given to help treat un￾controlled movements and tremors.
291 | P a g e
 Muscle relaxers (baclofen) are given to help relax con￾tracted or stiff muscles.
 Anticonvulsants (gabapentin) are given to prevent seizures.
 Allow extra time for care and activities. Provide calm envi￾ronment.
 Patients are often easily stressed with daily activities and 
may need extra time to complete tasks.
 Avoid rushing patient during care or treatments to allow 
time for patient to understand and feel more comfortable.
 Assist parents and providers develop Individual Education 
Plans for educational success
 Patient with CP have varying degrees of disabilities. Help 
292 | P a g e
family and providers create educational plans with schools 
and learning facilities to meet the patient’s individual needs 
and provide the best learning experience.
 Provide patient and parent / caregiver education about nu￾trition, skin care and resources for therapy and support
 Help patients and their families feel more comfortable with 
home and daily care of patient and have access to re￾sources for specific needs
293 | P a g e
D. MUSCULAR DYSTROPHIES
 Muscular dystrophies are a group of chronic muscle disor￾ders characterized by a progressive weakening and wasting 
of the skeletal or voluntary muscles. 
 Most are inherited. The pathologic features include degen￾eration and loss of muscle fibers, variation in muscle fiber 
size, phagocytosis and regeneration, and replacement of 
muscle tissue by connective tissue. 
294 | P a g e
 
295 | P a g e
Clinical Manifestations
 Muscle wasting and weakness.
 Gastrointestinal tract problems: gastric dilation, rectal pro￾lapse, and fecal impaction.
 Cardiomyopathy is a common complication in all forms of 
muscular dystrophy.
Medical Management
 Treatment focuses on supportive care and prevention of 
complications. A therapeutic exercise program is individu-
296 | P a g e
alized to prevent muscle tightness, contractures, and dis￾use atrophy.
 Night splints and stretching exercises are employed to de￾lay joint contractures (especially ankles, knees, and hips). 
 Braces may be used to compensate for muscle weakness. 
 The patient may be fitted with an orthotic jacket to improve 
sitting stability, reduce trunk deformity, and support car￾diovascular status. Spinal fusion may be performed to 
maintain spinal stability. 
 All upper respiratory infections and fractures from falls are 
treated vigorously to minimize immobilization and to pre￾vent joint contractures. 
297 | P a g e
 Advise genetic counseling because of the genetic nature of 
this disease. Also advise patient to consult with appropriate 
caregivers for dental and speech problems and gastrointes￾tinal tract problems.
Nursing Management
 The goals are to maintain function at optimal levels and 
enhance the quality of life.
 Attend to patient’s physical requirements and emotional 
and developmental needs.
298 | P a g e
 Actively involve patient and family in decision making, in￾cluding end-of-life decisions.
 During hospitalization for treatment of complications, as￾sess knowledge and expertise of patient and family respon￾sible for giving care in the home. Assist patient and family 
to maintain coping strategies used at home while in the 
hospital.
 Provide patient and family with information about the dis￾order, its anticipated course, and care and management 
strategies that will optimize patient’s growth and develop￾ment and physical and psychological status.
299 | P a g e
 Communicate recommendations to all members of the 
health care team so that they work toward common goals.
 Encourage patient to use self-help devices to achieve 
greater independence; assist adolescents to make transi￾tion to adulthood. Encourage education and job tracking 
as appropriate.
 When teaching family to monitor patient for respiratory 
problems, give information regarding appropriate respira￾tory support, such as negative-pressure devices and posi￾tive pressure ventilators.
 Encourage range-of-motion exercises to prevent disabling 
contractures. Assist family in adjusting home environment 
300 | P a g e
to maximize functional independence; patient may require 
manual or electric wheelchair, gait aids, seating systems, 
bathroom equipment, lifts, ramps, and additional activity 
of daily living aids.
 Assess for signs of depression, prolonged anger, bargain￾ing, or denial and help patient to cope and adapt to chronic 
disease. Arrange for referral to a psychiatric nurse clinician 
or other mental health professional if indicated to assist 
patient to cope and adapt to the disease.
 Provide a hopeful, supportive, and nurturing environment.
301 | P a g e
302 | P a g e
Hinkle, J.L
Brunner & Suddarth's Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing. Philadelphia: 
Wolters Kluwer.
Lewis, S.L., Dirksen, S.R., Heitkemper, M.M., Bucher, L., & Harding, M.M. 
(2017). Medical-Surgical Nursing: Assessment and Management of Clinical 
Problems (10th ed.). St. Louis: Elsevier.
Potter, P.A., Perry, A.G., Stockert, P.A., & Hall, A.M. (2019). Essentials for Nursing 
Practice (9th ed.). St. Louis: Elsevier.
Wilkinson, J.M., Treas, L.S., Barnett, K.L., & Smith, M.H. (2016). Fundamentals of 
Nursing: Volume 1- Theory, Concepts, and Applications; Volume 2- Thinking, Do￾ing, and Caring. (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: F.A. Davis Co.
Pathophysiology Textbooks for Nurses
Grossman, S.C. & Porth, C.M. (2014). Porth’s Pathophysiology: Concepts of Al￾tered Health States (9th ed.). Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer.
McCance, K.L. & Huether, S.E. (2017). Understanding Pathophysiology: The Bio￾logic Basis for Disease in Adults and Children (6th ed.). St. Louis: Elsevier/Mosby.
303 | P a g e
J
